THE APPLICATION OF AUTONOMY AND MACHINE LEARNING TO IMPROVE PLATFORM
PERFORMANCE.

Major Tom Scott, British Army.

Abstract.

Introduction. 

Manoeuvre warfare, by definition, has sought to avoid strengths and
exploit weaknesses (Clemons and Santamaria, 2002). As a result, it has
found itself in a cycle of innovation, each change incurs a reaction,
which in turn initiates a counteraction (Steven and Watt, 2010). This
cycle has led to consistent, iterative development in both AFV
protection and lethality simultaneously. World War Two can provide some
of the best examples of such development, the Matilda (1941) and the
Churchill (1944) are both employed in the infantry support roles, yet
the Churchill increased in weight by 30% (Cowper and Pannell, 2011). As
manoeuvre warfare has developed, as too have protection and lethality
requirements, the Churchill weighted 35.3T, a Theatre Entry Standard
Challenger 2 weighs 74.5T (Jane’s, 2019). Developments in lethality and
protection are ultimately driven by the requirements for one to defeat
the other. As such, lethality and protection developments are cyclical
and directly related, as one increases so too must the other, ultimately
resulting in a trade-off against weight and mobility (Rahman et al.,
2017).

One of the key drivers for the 111% increase in weight between the
Churchill and the Challenger 2, has been the advent of ammunition such
as the Long Rod Penetrator (LRP) and shaped charge. Modern platforms
require thick heterogeneous armour to defeat these types of projectile.
The Churchill could defeat 81mm of homogenous steel armour (Cowper and
Pannell, 2011); a tungsten LRP fired at 2000m/s from a modern Main
Battle Tank (MBT) could defeat a metre of homogenous steel armour
(Liden, 2010). The 74.5T weight is significant, making many roads and
bridges inaccessible for manoeuvre. Whilst armour developments present a
viable solution to mitigate the threat, the mobility sacrifices have
meant that traditional passive armour development is unable to continue
to develop in the same way. This will present a mismatch between
firepower and protection. To enable platforms to remain survivable,
manoeuvre platforms have had to find other avenues by which to defeat
these highly potent threats, than passive armour alone.

The advancement of Active Protection Systems (APS) has hailed as a
solution, enabling increased survivability without the increased mass of
traditional armour. These systems were first seen by the USSR in the
late 70’s with the Drozd system (Meyer, 1998a). APS has continued to be
an area of research and investment, as demonstrated by systems such as
Trophy being integrated into the US Abrams platform (Keller, 2018). It
was however, not until the latest generation of main battle tanks, and
the inherent mobility vs survivability trade-off, that investment was
seen to be wide-spread. Despite the recent growth, there remains
inherent flaws. Whilst effective against most Anti-Tank Guided Missiles
(ATGM) the speed and kinetic nature required of an LRP outpaces what is
possible by APS (Hazell, 2016). Furthermore, even if an engagement was
possible, the projectile is likely to retain sufficient residual kinetic
energy to cause significant damage to its target, denying the ability to
remove passive armour (Fortin, Bédard and Valcartier, 2007). Whilst
originally promising APS, in its current guise, falls short of being
able to reset the lethality, protection and mobility balance.

Growth of autonomy and machine learning

Autonomy and machine learning have been transformative in the private
sector and are expected to have a similar effect on defence (RAS
STRATEGY). Incremental changes have long been seen by the business world
as insufficient to generate long lasting advantage (Bradley, Smit and
Hirt, 2018). The application of these technologies to the complex and
challenging problem of platform survivability may provide a sufficient
leap to break the innovation cycle and generate lasting advantage.

Application to the problem

Enabling yaw

Trust and risk

Statement of purpose: This paper will demonstrate an approach by which a
layered combination machine learning algorithms, integrated into an
autonomous platform and applied to platform defence, could defeat a LRP
and enable a step-change in platform survivability.

Methodology. 

Results.

Discussion. 

Dependancy on level of autonomy

Platform agency.

Balance of risk and protection in autonomous systems.

Phalanx example.

Stands distinct from the development of autonomous weapon systems as it
aims to protect life.

Other potential use cases.

CRANFIELD UNIVERSITY

MAJOR TOM SCOTT

DEFEAT OF A LONG ROD PENETRATOR USING AN AUTONOMOUS SYSTEM:

ASSESS THE FEASIBILITY OF SEPARATING THE ACTIVE PROTECTION SYSTEMS FROM
THE PROTECTED PLATFORM, USING AN AUTONOMOUS SYSTEM, TO DEFEAT THE THREAT
OF A LONG-ROD PENETRATOR.

Cranfield Defence and Security

MSc Thesis

Battlespace Technology Course (BTC 13)

Aug 2020

Cranfield University

Cranfield Defence and Security

MSc Thesis

Battlespace Technology Course (BTC13)

Registered on MSc in Academic Year 2019-2021

MAJOR TOM SCOTT

Assess the feasibility of separating the Active Protection Systems (APS)
from the protected platform, using an autonomous system, to defeat the
threat of a long-rod penetrator (LRP).

Academic Supervisor: Dr Rachael Hazael

Aug 2020

This thesis is submitted as part of the Master of Science Degree in
Battlespace Technology. It was written by a student on the Battlespace
Technology Course. It has not been significantly altered or corrected as
a result of assessment and it may contain errors or omissions. The views
expressed in it, together with any recommendations, are those of the
author and not Cranfield University or individual members of its staff.

© Crown Copyright Aug 2020. All rights reserved. No part of this
publication may be reproduced without the written permission of the
copyright holder.

ABSTRACT

Armoured platforms were the product of an arms race and this has been a
defining characteristic of their existence. The competition between
firepower and protection has been a cycle that has served to
consistently increase the weight of the platforms, to the extent that it
cannot continue. As a result, new and novel methods of protection must
be sought to defeat the increasing firepower threat. The most
challenging of these threats could be perceived to be the long-rod
penetrator; extremely fast, low-signature and un-jammable, they present
a threat to which passive armour and current Active Protection Systems
cannot defeat. The continued development of land autonomous systems may
present an opportunity, by dislocation the defence and the target
platform, to defeat using different mechanisms, quicker and more
dynamically, exploiting the virtues of an autonomous platform. This
paper seeks to demonstrate, theoretically, how such an approach could
generate an Active Protection System that can out-perform current models
by defeating the pacing threat of a long-rod penetrator.

Keywords:

Artificial Intelligence (AI), Unmanned Ground Vehicle (UGV), Defensive
Aid Suites (DAS), Active Protection, manoeuvre, armour, Long Rod
Penetrator (LRP), autonomy, survivability, Manned Unmanned-Teaming
(MUM-T), Armour.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Firstly, I would like to thank Dr Rachael Hazael, my thesis advisor, for
her support and advice throughout the entirety of this project. Your
advice from the outset enabled me to turn what was a fledgling idea into
a viable concept and Throughout your guidance and feedback has been
incredible, ensuring that I was able to keep true to my aim, during what
has been a rather unconventional period of research.

I would also like to thank Jeremy Smith for allowing me to benefit from
his wealth of simulation and modelling knowledge. Your advice was
exceptionally helpful and enabled me to develop a set of models that,
without your advice, would not have been possible.

Finally, to my Fiancé, Henrietta. You have tirelessly supported,
motivated and inspired me throughout this journey and without your help
none of it would have been possible.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT i

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ii

LIST OF TABLES vii

LIST OF EQUATIONS viii

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS ix

1 INTRODUCTION 1-1

1.1 Background 1-1

1.2 Project Aim 1-3

1.3 Project Scope 1-3

1.4 Concept Introduction 1-5

2 LITERATURE REVIEW: LONG ROD PENETRATOR 2-1

2.1.1 Trajectory 2-1

2.1.2 Range 2-4

2.1.3 Speed 2-6

2.1.4 Length 2-10

2.1.5 Baseline LRP Characteristics 2-12

2.2 Literature review APS 2-12

2.2.1 Review of current active protection methods 2-13

2.2.2 APS Analysis 2-15

2.2.3 LRP defeat methods 2-19

2.3 Concept Requirements 2-24

3 DETECT THE THREAT 3-1

3.1 Sensor Requirements 3-1

3.1.1 Track the Protectee 3-2

3.1.2 Detect the Threat. 3-6

3.1.3 Track the Threat. 3-10

3.1.4 Developing the intercept point. 3-15

3.2 Summary 3-18

4 ENGAGE THE THREAT 4-2

4.1 Probability of hit 4-2

4.1.1 Assumptions 4-2

4.1.2 Define 4-3

4.1.3 Establish 4-13

4.2 System requirements 4-22

5 Additional engagement characteristics 5-24

5.1 Where to hit 5-24

5.1.1 Real world case studies. 5-27

6 CONCLUSION 6-1

6.1 Requirements and characteristics 6-1

6.2 Practical Feasibility 6-2

6.3 Applicability in a complex environment 6-5

6.4 Summary 6-6

7 AREAS OF FUTURE RESEARCH. 7-1

8 REFERENCES 8-2

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure ‎1‑1 Sub-system dependency model 1-4

Figure ‎1‑2 Stage 1-3 of the process. 1-6

Figure ‎1‑3 Stage 4 of the process. 1-6

Figure ‎2‑1 Demonstration of Aerodynamic Jump (Bundy, 2001) 2-2

Figure ‎2‑2 Yaw rate over the flight of an LRP (Sharma-Panda et al.,
2017). 2-3

Figure ‎2‑3 Dataset of range (Table ‎2‑1) plotted with the mean,
standard deviation and the selected baseline range assumptions. 2-6

Figure ‎2‑4 LRP and ATGM speed (m/s) and Time of Flight (s) comparison.
2-8

Figure ‎2‑5 LRP speed (m/s) and Time of Flight (s) comparison. 2-9

Figure ‎2‑6 Plot of Length/Diameter 2-11

Figure ‎2‑7 Iron Fist projectile pictured just before detonation in the
defeat of an RPG-7 projectile. (General Dynamics OTS, 2011). 2-15

Figure ‎2‑8 Diagram showing a comparison of engagement ranges between
the aforementioned systems 2-17

Figure ‎2‑9 Iron Fist Light Launcher module. 2-18

Figure ‎2‑10 Sequences of damage plot during the interaction with a
forward/backwards moving plate (Liden, 2010) 2-20

Figure ‎2‑11 Rocco yaw angle data plotted cumulatively 2-23

Figure ‎2‑12 Yaw angle prediction using polynomial regression 2-24

Figure ‎3‑1 Engagement sequence 3-2

Figure ‎3‑2 The recorded paths of a leader-follower, displaying both a
corrected and an uncorrected IMU, highlighting the impact of IMU drift.
(Borenstein et al., 2010) 3-5

Figure ‎3‑3 Visual representation of method 1 against the platform and
shot signature. 3-7

Figure ‎3‑4 Directional view of an LRP sabot discarding (Huang, Wessam
and Chen, 2014) 3-8

Figure ‎3‑5 Engagement sequence model showing engagement time (s)
engagements at each of the chosen ranges. 3-10

Figure ‎3‑6 Interception calculation data requirement diagram 3-11

Figure ‎3‑7 Azimuth and elevation triangulation using multiple IR
sensors (Ullah, Song and Kirubarajan, 2015) 3-14

Figure ‎3‑8 Linear regression algorithm showing relationship between
distance from the platform and time of flight 3-16

Figure ‎3‑9 Layered sensor data points 3-17

Figure ‎3‑10 Active sensors model: image processing, RADAR and LiDAR.
3-19

Figure ‎3‑11 Passive sensor model: Image Processing, passive RADAR and
passive IR. 3-19

Figure ‎4‑1 Probability of Hit 4-2

Figure ‎4‑2 Intercept probability diagram 4-4

Figure ‎4‑3 X_Data development 4-6

Figure ‎4‑4 X,Y Intercept Model Data 4-7

Figure ‎4‑5 Success Threshold. The black dashed line shows a >0.7 the
green dashed line shows a >0.8. 4-8

Figure ‎4‑6 Data distribution. each of the violin plots represent the
spread of predicted intercept points for each combination of sensor
accuracy (x-axis) and variance. 4-8

Figure ‎4‑7 25mm Probability using polynomial regression 4-9

Figure ‎4‑8 Z Intercept model data. 4-11

Figure ‎4‑9 Z-Axis Intercept model representation, displaying the
prediction curves for each of the last sensed data times, the dashed
line represents a PPip of 0.7. 4-12

Figure ‎4‑10 Effector probability diagram, the blue shaded area
represents the potential spread of the effector.. 4-14

Figure ‎4‑11 Critical Ricochet angle of a LRP (Daneshjou and Shahravi,
2008) 4-15

Figure ‎4‑12 Kinetic Energy of a 10g and 100g projectile, the red line
represents 3300J of KE. 4-16

Figure ‎4‑13 Effector engagement distances, each black line represents
the three potential engagement times 4-19

Figure ‎4‑14 Trajectory comparison (ShootersCalculator, 2020) 4-20

Figure ‎4‑15 ISO 286 manufacture tolerances (International Organisation
for Standardisation, 2010) 4-21

Figure ‎4‑16 Dispersion rates across ISO 286 IT levels, 100% of eff
diameter = 25mm 4-22

Figure ‎4‑17 Summary probability tree 4-22

Figure ‎5‑1 Projectile section definition 5-25

Figure ‎5‑2 Initial impact and effect of drag from a plan view. 5-26

Figure ‎5‑3 Area plot showing the impact on likelihood of hit for
differing percentages of the baseline dimensions. 5-29

Figure ‎6‑1 Practical engagement sequence example. 6-3

Figure ‎6‑2 Cone of protection calculation at minimum intercept range
(9m) and a larger range (20m) 6-4

LIST OF TABLES

Table ‎2‑1 Consolidated engagement data (Olsen, 1994). 2-5

Table ‎2‑2 Consolidated list of APFSDS data. 2-6

Table ‎2‑3 Summary of L/D data 2-11

Table ‎2‑4 Summary of LRP baseline characteristics 2-12

Table ‎2‑5 List of reviewed APS 2-13

Table ‎2‑6 Yaw angle at certain distances (Rocco, 2018) 2-22

Table ‎2‑7 Summary of Concept Requirements 2-25

Table ‎4‑1 Effector requirements 4-23

Table ‎5‑1 Projectile kinetic energy 5-25

Table ‎5‑2 Projectiles with the smallest dimensions 5-27

Table ‎6‑1 Consolidated table of system requirements and
characteristics. 6-1

LIST OF EQUATIONS

Equation ‎3‑1 Radar range equation 3-13

Equation ‎4‑2 X, Y Intercept equation 4-7

Equation 4-3 PPip variables 4-13

Equation 4-4 Kinetic Energy 4-15

Equation 4-5 Energy transfer upon impact equation 4-16

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

  AI       Artificial Intelligence
  -------- -------------------------------------------------
  AFV      Armoured Fighting Vehicle
  APC      Armoured Personnel Carrier
  APFSDS   Armour Piercing Fin Stabilised Discarding Sabot
  APS      Active Protection System
  ATGM     Anti-Tank Guided Missile
  COTS     Commercial Off-The-Shelf
  CU       Cranfield University
  DGPS     Differential Global Positioning Satellite
  EMS      Electro-Magnetic Spectrum
  ERA      Explosive Reactive Armour
  IMU      Inertial Measurement Unit
  LRP      Long Rod Penetrator
  L/D      Length/Diameter
  LDEW     Laser Directed Energy Weapons
  LiDAR    Light Detection and Ranging
  LOS      Line of Sight
  MBT      Main Battle Tank
  MEFP     Multiple Explosively Formed Projectiles
  MWR      Millimetric Wave Radar
  PIP      Projectile Intercept Point
  RADAR    Radio Detection and Ranging
  RCS      Radar Cross-Section
  TRL      Technology Readiness Level
  ToF      Time of Flight
  UAS      Unmanned Aerial System
  UGV      Unmanned Ground Vehicle
           
           
           
           

INTRODUCTION

Background

Manoeuvre warfare, by definition, has sought to avoid strengths and
exploit weaknesses (Clemons and Santamaria, 2002). As a result, it has
found itself in a cycle of innovation, each change incurs a reaction,
which in turn initiates a counteraction (Steven and Watt, 2010). This
cycle has led to consistent, iterative development in both AFV
protection and lethality simultaneously. World War Two can provide some
of the best examples of such development, the Matilda (1941) and the
Churchill (1944) are both employed in the infantry support roles, yet
the Churchill increased in weight by 30% (Cowper and Pannell, 2011). As
manoeuvre warfare has developed, as too have protection and lethality
requirements, the Churchill weighted 35.3T, a Theatre Entry Standard
Challenger 2 weighs 74.5T (Jane’s, 2019). Developments in lethality and
protection are ultimately driven by the requirements for one to defeat
the other. As such, lethality and protection developments are cyclical
and directly related, as one increases so too must the other, ultimately
resulting in a trade-off against weight and mobility (Rahman et al.,
2017).

One of the key drivers for the 111% increase in weight between the
Churchill and the Challenger 2, has been the advent of ammunition such
as the Long Rod Penetrator (LRP) and shaped charge. Modern platforms
require thick heterogeneous armour to defeat these types of projectile.
The Churchill could defeat 81mm of homogenous steel armour (Cowper and
Pannell, 2011); a tungsten LRP fired at 2000m/s from a modern Main
Battle Tank (MBT) could defeat a metre of homogenous steel armour
(Liden, 2010). The 74.5T weight is significant, making many roads and
bridges inaccessible for manoeuvre. Whilst armour developments present a
viable solution to mitigate the threat, the mobility sacrifices have
meant that traditional passive armour development is unable to continue
to develop in the same way. This will present a mismatch between
firepower and protection. To enable platforms to remain survivable,
manoeuvre platforms have had to find other avenues by which to defeat
these highly potent threats, than passive armour alone.

One method of increasing survivability is to invest in Active Protection
Systems (APS). These systems were first seen by the USSR in the late
70’s with the Drozd system (Meyer, 1998a). APS has continued to be an
area of research and investment, as demonstrated by systems such as
Trophy being integrated into the US Abrams platform (Keller, 2018). It
was however, not until the latest generation of main battle tanks, and
the inherent mobility vs survivability trade-off, that investment was
seen to be wide spread. This could be the result of technological
developments increasing the capability of APS, but also suggests that
the balance between protection, lethality and mobility cannot be
maintained. APS is generally broken into two areas, hard and soft kill.
Hard kill is defined as ﻿“systems that are able to detect, track and
engage an incoming projectile threat” (Hazell, 2016) and Soft Kill is
defined as a “﻿system designed to avoid threats by confusing or
re-directing the threats using jammers, decoys, and signature reduction
measures” (Houliotis et al., 2018). Primarily APS was developed for
three reasons (Meyer, 1998a):

1.  Anti-Tank Guided Missiles (ATGMs) had developed beyond the
    capability of traditional armour systems. This is most notably the
    result of top attack profiles (Jane’s Defence, 2019a) which target
    the top of the turret, the area with the least armour distribution,
    and tandem shaped charge warheads (Wisniewski and Podgorzak, 2005).

2.  It is significantly cheaper to develop applique or modular APS
    systems for platforms than develop and fit complex armour systems.

3.  The Drozd system weighed only 800kg and afforded protection for up
    to a 40° arc, in effect this would covering the frontal arc of the
    Whittaker model (Hazell, 2016). This lightweight enables the same
    protection level to be fitted to both light (<20T) and heavy (>20T)
    armoured vehicles, with minimal effect on mobility.

These advantages are significant and present a very attractive
opportunity for protection development. Hard Kill APS in particular
presents three significant weaknesses, which make them fall short of an
ideal armour solution:

-   The physics required to defeat a LRP is significant, despite
    technological advances modern APS still falls short of providing a
    reliable method of defeating the threat (Hazell, 2016).

-   The explosive force required to defeat a threat is significant. This
    also causes a sizeable level of collateral concerns, limiting its
    employment in the urban environment or in the vicinity of dismounts
    (Hazell, 2016). For example the Arena system uses a fragmentation
    grenade with a safety range of up to 30m (Meyer, 1998b).

-   The residual energy of a projectile may still be significant.
    Projectiles are often engaged at close range to the platform. As a
    result APS does not achieve the same protection effect for lightly
    armoured vehicles, which must rely more upon soft kill systems to
    defeat at range (Fortin, Bédard and Valcartier, 2007).

An LRP exacerbates each of the three weaknesses above. They are
extremely fast, retain significant kinetic energy and their kinetic
nature prevent soft kill effects. When combined, these factors suggest
that the LRP is the most difficult threat for APS to defeat.

Project Aim

The aim of this research project is to verify the feasibility of
employing autonomous Unmanned Ground Vehicles (UGV) to provide active
protection to manned platforms. By doing so, it will demonstrate that
they could outperform current Commercial Off The Shelf (COTS) APS
systems, by defeating the LRP threat. The research will focus on the
technical feasibility of this activity, in order to justify this
hypothesis.

Project Scope

The concept of an autonomous active protection platform is a complex and
broad subject, which could form multiple independent theses. This paper
will therefore require a tight scope of work to ensure that the project
aim is focussed to achieve the depth required for this thesis. The
object of this research is solely the protection capability of the
platform, it will therefore only focus on the sub-systems directly
related to this action; the sensors, effectors and processing tools.
Figure ‎1‑1 illustrates how these components relate and their importance
to the system as a whole. Sub-systems such as the navigation tools and
automotive capabilities will not be included within the scope of the
essay. Each of the sub-systems will be examined in detail and either
tested or modelled, however, the project will not test the full
integration of the functions. Some emerging technologies will be
explored, though the paper will only discuss capabilities that are
considered currently technologically feasible. For the purpose of this
thesis, using the MOD’s Technology Readiness Levels (TRL),
technologically feasible is defined as TRL 3 and above (UK Government,
2014). Some aspects of the employment of the platform will be used to
demonstrate its utility and bound the constraints in which it must
operate. This project will however focus on the technological
feasibility of the concept not the doctrine of its usage, which excludes
areas such as resupply or recharging.

[A close up of a logo Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎1‑1 Sub-system dependency model (Heine, Wickert and Thoma, 2013)

To provide the scope of the research the following assumptions will be
made about the concept:

-   The platform will have sufficient mobility to maintain pace with the
    formation it is protecting. This assumption is based on the state of
    current UGV technologies such as the Textron Ripsaw (Maundril,
    2019).

-   Full autonomy is technologically feasible for this type of platform.
    The current probability that 10% of all US cars on the road being
    driverless by 2025 is 78% (Schwab, 2016). The complexity required
    for driverless cars exceeds that of this platform which perhaps
    better reflects the technology of current follow-me drones using
    proximity, rather than GPS (Mao et al., 2017). It is thus assumed
    that the platform is capable of operating with sufficient autonomy
    to navigate, move and engage the targets, within a set of human
    dictated parameters, a mission.

-   LRP ammunition and gun systems have not developed beyond current in
    service capabilities. Whilst it is accepted that lethality
    capabilities will continue to develop, to ensure that an effective
    baseline for experimentation exists the most current capability will
    be assumed to be the most potent threat.

-   The platform retains sufficient power to execute its task for the
    duration of its mission. Autonomy will have high power demands,
    however, it is assumed that the advances in battery technology will
    provide enough power to sustain the operation of the platform.

-   Policies and regulations to enable battlefield use of autonomous
    platforms capable of kinetic effects are in place. Furthermore, such
    platforms are of sufficient maturity to enable their employment in
    the direct vicinity of manned platforms.

Concept Introduction

The concept utilises a system of UGVs to provide active protection to a
small armoured vehicle formation. Each UGV will autonomously position
itself then detect, classify and defeat incoming threats to the
formation, forming an active protection bubble similar to Electronic
Counter Measures. A potential platform use may be in the protection of
Strike Combat Teams from the UK’s Strike Brigade (Watling and Bronk,
2019), in which small packets of 4-8 vehicles will be operating
independently within the enemy’s area of operation. The primary vehicles
in Strike, Ajax and the Mechanised Infantry Vehicle, are not heavy
armour and as such are vulnerable in the area, especially to tanks. In
this situation, the inclusion of an autonomous active protection
platform could be employed to reduce this threat.

The concept operates in four distinct phases to provide protection.
Stage one, the platform establishes itself in relation to the protected
formation, then in relation to other protection platforms, ensuring
deconfliction, then finally in relation to the likely threat areas.
Stage two, the platform will then identify and classify likely threat
areas to increase the speed of target acquisition. Stage three is
initiated at the point at which a threat is detected, at this stage the
platform will classify the threat, then predict its speed, flightpath
and Predicted Intercept Point (PIP). Finally, stage four, the system
will initiate its effector to neutralise the threat. The process is
represented pictorially in Figure 1‑2 and Figure 1‑3.

[][A picture containing ground, outdoor, sky Description automatically
generated]

For the UGV to be effective it is reliant upon a high degree of
autonomy. Many nations define autonomous weapon systems differently, a
House of Lords select committee was established to understand the
implications of autonomy for UK defence. The difference between nations
can be quite stark and is likely to be the result of potential areas of
future investment. Autonomous weapon systems particularly attract a
large amount of moral debate, as a result, some nations are
significantly more risk averse in their definitions. It is also likely
that this is why the UK have in fact declined to define autonomous
weapons, accepting that they will accept any internationally agreed
definition, but until that point they suggest that the UN Convention of
Human Rights is a sufficient limit for the capability (House Of Lords,
2018). This would suggest that the UK is unwilling to formally declare
its investment in autonomous weapon systems, but is actively researching
it as an area of development. The US have defined the concept and given
the alignment of the US and UK defence approaches, this will be a
sufficient definition for this paper:

“A weapon system that, once activated, can select and engage targets
without further intervention by a human operator.” (House Of Lords,
2018)

Autonomy is often detailed in levels from 1-5 (Ward, 2018), scoped from
minor task automation to operating entirely without human input. For the
system to be reactive enough to detect, process and defeat threats it
must be of at least level four, a very high level requiring input only
to initiate tasks. These levels of autonomy are still developing, with
the nearest example being autonomous vehicles (Capgemini, 2019),
however, a level 4 autonomous vehicle is predicted to be ready by 2021.
As such, for the remainder of this project, it will be assumed that
level four autonomy will be technologically viable. In this concept
level four autonomy may require a user only to dictate the arcs of
likely threats. Whereas level five would require no interaction from
vehicle crews once the system is activated.

High levels of autonomy are complex and such platforms are a large leap
in capability from current in service UGVs. It must however, be
acknowledged that to retain the technical advantage such jumps must be
made, systems like this could ensure that a force retains the
“intellectual edge” (Ryan, 2019). In addition, autonomous systems in
this specific context provide a number of key benefits to a user,
demonstrating its suitability for this concept:

-   The platforms are geographically dislocated from the protected
    platform, generating standoff and enabling yaw-induction to be an
    effective counter.

-   The system can be re-allocated immediately to protect a platform of
    greater need, this means that significantly fewer numbers are
    required when compared to an integrated platform APS.

-   The dislocation from the protected platform significantly reduces
    the likelihood of collateral damage to personnel, when contrasted
    with other current Hard Kill systems.

-   With the UGV being designed solely for this purpose its entire
    payload can be dedicated to the task enabling significantly greater
    payload than a current platform mounted system.

-   Similarly, the power available to be dedicated to active protection
    is likely to be much higher than that of a platform which has active
    protection as a secondary task. This therefore means the system
    could increase in complexity.

-   Manned platforms will not have the increased weight of a Hard-Kill
    APS, meaning that they do not have to sacrifice mobility for
    protection.

-   The response time required from threat detection to launch of
    effector is too short for a man-in-the-loop, it must be done
    autonomously. For example a projectile firing at 1200m/s from 1500m
    away will only have a 1.25s time of flight.

Developments in autonomous systems is inherently juxtaposed by the moral
complexity of arming a system which in effect thinks for itself, it
therefore must be highlighted as a significant constraint to the
concept. The ethics of autonomy is a vast subject and it will not be
covered in detail within this paper[1]. The concern stems from the
reality that a human death being the result of an entirely autonomous
decision. An autonomous system inherently lacks emotion in its decision
making. This means the value of life is not a factor to the robot
(Petman, 2017), it may therefore make different decisions during an
engagement than a human would make. A distinction must be made between
Artificial Intelligence as a whole, and machine learning. The ethical
complexities of a system which uses learned experience to develop and
adapt its behaviour has far greater implications than a “narrow” AI
system (Naudé and Dimitri, 2019) that makes its decisions based on
pre-determined rule sets, this is exacerbated by experiences of machine
learning outcomes being unpredictable(de Saint Laurent, 2018). In
November 2017, of the 86 countries which met to debate the legality of
autonomous weapons systems, 22 supported prohibition of the capability
(House Of Lords, 2018), demonstrating the true level of concern these
systems invoke.

There is a significant counter-argument to the ethical concerns around
the use of autonomous weapons. Regardless of application, inherently the
system will save lives of the user, and it does so without fatigue or
ambiguity. The concept stated within this paper expands on this latter
point, as a defensive system it is designed to save the lives of those
it protects, despite being armed, its primary target are projectiles. In
light of these factors, it is assumed that this system will either
satisfy the ethical concerns regarding its use or public opinion will
adapt, as understanding of the technology becomes more widespread.

LITERATURE REVIEW: LONG ROD PENETRATOR 

The intent of this review is to understand the key characteristics of a
LRP, the limitations of passive systems and the state of active systems.
The majority of studies around the LRP topic have been in relation to
impact characteristics and penetrative capability. This review will
therefore establish a baseline of LRP knowledge in these areas by
reviewing the limited relevant prior studies. The paper will then
analyse and build upon the data, with the ultimate outcome being the
formulation of parameters and requirements for which the APS must
satisfy to defeat an LRP. To correctly define the characteristics of an
LRP, the paper will assess four components, which relate specifically to
the flight of the projectile: trajectory, speed, length and range. Each
one of these directly correlates to a design criterion of the APS.

Trajectory

The trajectory of an LRP is relevant to the operation of APS system as
it is a unique characteristic it could enable a potential threat to be
easily classified, through determination of its approach angle. This
would enable projectile recognition. The flat profile of an LRP is in
direct contrast to ATGMs such as Javelin, which has a steep dive profile
(Jane’s Defence, 2019a) or the Kornet-E which laser-beam riding guidance
causes it to constantly adjust in flight, creating a highly irregular
profile. Arguably the most important reason is that it enables an
interception point determination, by adding a predictability component.
These opportunities whilst highly helpful in enabling the defeat of a
system do face an element of complexity.

Whilst the kinematic nature of the round would infer that the trajectory
would be flat and straight, enabling the round to correlate with the
sight picture and hit the target, this is in-fact false. The projectile
has two phases of flight, launch-disturbance and free flight (Bundy,
2001). Launch-disturbance is characterised by the projectile retaining
its sabot, this can cause drag which can cause unbalances and deviation
from the line of the barrel, similarly the launch itself can cause
lateral effects on the projectile. Free-flight is denoted as the point
at which the sabot no longer interacts with the projectile, the sabot
will begin to disengage from the projectile once it has left the barrel,
it is at this point where Aerodynamic Jump can occur. If the sabot is
asymmetric as a result of high launch disturbance, it can cause an
uneven sabot discard, generating lift and drag in a manner which can
cause the projectile to swerve. As the free-flight continues this
phenomena will reduce, but it could have a direct effect on the axis of
the round, this is characterised by Figure ‎2‑1:

[A close up of a map Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎2‑1 Demonstration of Aerodynamic Jump (Bundy, 2001)

This paper continues and suggests that Aerodynamic Jump can be accounted
for through a formulaic algorithm by the launch platform, this does not
entirely transfer to the target platform. Aerodynamic Jump effects are a
result of the variance within the launch sequence and immediate
environment; these are unlikely to be the predictable at the target
platform. As such, it will be very difficult for the impact of the
projectile to be calculated effectively. Aerodynamic Jump will force the
APS platform to either account for it or extend the sensor sample time
beyond the effects of the phenomena. This is a key constraint on
engagement boundaries.

The second area which may impact on the trajectory of a projectile is
the meteorological effects. This has been demonstrated to have a
significant impact of the trajectory of projectiles such as artillery
shells (Zhou, Wang and Zhou, 2016). A Defence Technology paper that
assessed the reasons for dispersion among LRP engagements concluded that
meteorological variables did effect the dispersion of LRP (Sharma-Panda
et al., 2017). Whilst it does demonstrate that pressure, temperature and
wind had an impact on the dispersion, even when combined, it only
contributed to 0.8% (from the ±1α column) of the dispersion when
compared with either pitch or yaw. This is likely to be because of the
significant speed, flat profile and relative short range when compared
to artillery, which means that meteorological variances are minimised
throughout the flight profile. As such it will be assumed through this
paper that the impact of meteorological factors will not affect the
trajectory of the projectile.

The same study also analysed the yaw profile over the flight of a
projectile. Through modelling and live validation, it created a
projection of the yaw profile for five separate designs of LRP, Figure
‎2‑2 shows the results. This graph demonstrates two key characteristics
that have significant utility to the APS platform. Firstly, regardless
of the initial yaw angle the amplitude, as also seen in Figure ‎2‑1,
settled to a negligible angle as the time of flight progressed.
Secondly, the graph demonstrates that the yaw follows a predictable and
uniformed pattern. When these two factors are combined it leads to the
suggestion that although the projectile may yaw throughout flight, and
despite an initial yaw angle being high, the mean trajectory could be
calculated relatively early in the flight using a method such as linear
regression.

[A screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎2‑2 Yaw rate over the flight of an LRP (Sharma-Panda et al.,
2017).

 Range

The second LRP characteristic, which has a significant relevance to the
performance of the protection system, is the range from which it is
fired. The range, when combined with the speed, will directly relate to
the projectile time of flight and therefore dictate the time available
for the system to detect, process and defeat. This will therefore become
a key constraint for the protection system, if the processing takes too
long the ranges from which it the system is effective will be
significantly reduced. Through analysis of some existing data sets this
section of the literature review will aim to generate the likely
engagement ranges as an output.

The Military Operations Research Society study of engagement ranges was
initially developed to support the acquisition of Anti-Tank Guided
Missiles with a range beyond 2km (Olsen, 1994). The data was focussed on
two areas, firstly tank engagements in World War II, then it analysed a
series of defensive positions and defined the line of sight (LOS) from
that location. This therefore has high relevance to understanding modern
engagements. There have been technical advances in tank technology since
WWII, especially sights and fire control computers. These advances have
however, somewhat been mitigated within the dataset by the addition of
LOS data. It is assumed that elevation, curvature of the earth and
atmospheric conditions were the biggest determining factor of LOS and it
is also assumed that these remain largely similar. To maintain this
papers classification, it is inferred that this data remains accurate
for today. The data has been consolidated into Table ‎2‑1, which details
the percentage of engagements that happened below a certain range. Some
of the LOS data was taken from very open terrain, which causes a
distortion well beyond the standard deviation of the dataset. Most
modern platforms using an LRP are limited by engagement range, the
Challenger 2, which is still a leading platform has an effective range
of >2000m (Jane’s Defence, 2020). Serials 2.2 and 3.3 have been excluded
from the data, as the 90% figure for engagements were significantly
above the effective range of most LRP rounds, therefore an engagement
above this range would not be possible.

Table ‎2‑1 Consolidated engagement data (Olsen, 1994).

[A screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically generated]

The consolidated data has been displayed on the graph in Figure ‎2‑3
Dataset of range (Table ‎2‑1) plotted with the mean, standard deviation
and the selected baseline range assumptions.. It details the mean and
standard deviation of the data at each of the percentage marks. The
graph clearly demonstrates that there is a correlation of the data,
however in this instance using the mean across each value set may not
present the best outcome. To account for two factors, the technological
advances since WWII and the maximum assumed effective range of an LRP of
2000m, the paper will use the 50% positive standard deviation, 90% mean
and 99% negative standard deviation. This generated a range outcome of
840m, 1550m and 1990m. These figures represent a reasonable dispersion
across the possible engagement ranges and therefore could be used as a:
short, average and long, baseline range set for the system to be tested
against.

[A close up of a map Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎2‑3 Dataset of range (Table ‎2‑1) plotted with the mean,
standard deviation and the selected baseline range assumptions.

Speed

One of the characteristics that makes defending against an LRP so
demanding is the projectiles speed. The data in Table ‎2‑2 shows data
from a selection of the most common LRP’s in service today. The study of
these systems was designed to develop an average LRP speed from which a
baseline figure for the remainder of the research can be derived. The
speed data has a mean of 1664m/s and a standard deviation of 89m/s. The
deviation is sufficiently close to consider 1664m/s as a reasonable
baseline figure for LRP speed.

Table ‎2‑2 Consolidated list of APFSDS data.

  Projectile Name   Year   Speed(m/s)   Length(mm)   Country of Origin   References
  ----------------- ------ ------------ ------------ ------------------- -------------------------
  3BM32             1985   1700         4860         Russia              (Jane’s Defence, 2019b)
  3BM42             1988   1700         5710         Russia              (Jane’s Defence, 2019b)
  3BM46             2016   1700         6350         Russia              (Jane’s Defence, 2019b)
  OFL F2            1996   1780         5940         France              (Jane’s Defence, 2019c)
  DM88              2016   1715         7450         Germany             (Jane’s Defence, 2019d)
  M829A1            1992   1560         6840         USA                 (Jane’s Defence, 2019e)
  M829A3            2003   1555         6840         USA                 (Jane’s Defence, 2019e)
  L27A1             2001   1534         5120         UK                  (Jane’s Defence, 2019f)
  125-1             1993   1730         5540         China               (Jane’s Defence, 2019g)

When the data from a LRP is compared to that of ATGM’s, which most APS
systems are designed to defeat (Fortin, Bédard and Valcartier, 2007), a
significant void between the two projectiles is seen. Figure ‎2‑4
displays the correlation of Table ‎2‑2 and the addition of the Kornet E
(Global Security, 2019), MMP (MBDA, 2018) and Spike MR (Teal Group,
2019) ATGM’s. It shows a clear disparity between the time of projectile
flights at the previously established baseline distance, between the two
systems, in which lies the clear challenge of the APS system. This is
demonstrated by the red section within Figure ‎2‑4, the ATGM time of
flight is at best over 4.5s greater than an LRP. The system must still
be capable of defeating the projectile in a similar manner, despite the
significant increase in speed and reduction in ToF.

[A picture containing text Description automatically generated]

  Figure ‎2‑4 LRP and ATGM speed (m/s) and Time of Flight (s)
  comparison.

Figure ‎2‑5 plots the LRP speed from the data set in Table ‎2‑2, against
the time of flight, in seconds. The time of flight is calculated using
the baseline distance of 1551m as identified previously. Ultimately this
generates a mean flight time of 0.93s. This paper accepts that targeting
the mean, may generate a capability which may not defeat the most
difficult threat, however, each projectile has both strengths and
weaknesses, a particularly fast projectile may have reduced weight and
therefore not be the greatest threat. Assuming the most difficult in all
aspects, could create a very demanding hypothetical threat, which didn’t
reflect reality. As a result this paper will use the average projectile
as a baseline, generating a demanding ask, but not the most demanding,
in all areas. As a secondary task, the paper will refine and test some
models against the most challenging individual variables, such as speed
or length, to understand how these aspects would impact the engagement.

[A close up of a map Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎2‑5 LRP speed (m/s) and Time of Flight (s) comparison.

Another area that must be addressed in the area of speed, is to
understand the development trends of LRP. One area could be the
development of hypervelocity LRP launchers. Hypervelocity is generally
defined as speeds above 2500m/s (Paik et al., 2007). There are currently
four primary launcher categories: chemical (propellant), light gas,
electrically operated and electro-magnetic. Of these launchers only
chemical and light gas are relevant for the context of this platform,
the other two have a significant electrical demand, which makes them
impractical for the direct fire battle. Whilst both these launchers have
been tested, they have not yet reached a stage of development in which
they could be effectively employed on the battlefield, due to some acute
problems with the systems (Verma, Nomula and Bendre, 2017). Similarly
hypervelocity launchers have reached a relatively high technology
readiness level, for example BAE have developed their Hyper Velocity
Projectile (HVP) (BAE Systems, 2015). The HVP has been developed in a
155mm calibre, however as of yet, this has not transcended to 120mm
weapons.

Whilst there is continued development within hypervelocity ammunition it
is primarily focussed towards a naval platform. This is likely the
result of two factors, firstly, the power requirements for the most
advanced systems, such as an EM Railgun (BAE Systems, 2015). It is also
likely that the benefits of hypervelocity direct fire ammunition do not
provide benefits to the land domain worthy of the investment, naval
vessels are often very expensive and have engagements over long
distances. With a current LRP being capable of a time of flight, less
than a second, at the most likely engagement range, the benefits of a
speed increase may not deliver any tactical advantage. As such,
hypervelocity projectiles will not be considered further within this
research.

Length

The final characteristic of an LRP which will impact on the employment
of the system is the overall length of the projectile. The length
directly affects the choice of effector. It influences the defeat
mechanism, fragmentation or yaw, and it defines the amount of time that
an effector has to engage. Using the data from Table ‎2‑2 we can infer
that the mean length is 607mm, which means that at baseline speed the
projectile will travel its own length in 400μs. This will be the
baseline for the remainder of the research. In effect, this means for
the effector to impact, it will either have to be highly accurate or
cover a broad area. Length is often combined with diameter to predict
the penetration (Anderson et al., 1996), however little has been written
to determine the impact of length on either the flight speed or flight
profile of the projectile. Length/Diameter (L/D) is a common reference
for an LRP and has been used as a reference in a series of research into
LRP performance. One of these notable research areas has been into the
impact of yaw on penetration (Gee and Littlefield, 2001). This study
used varied L/D to fully understand the impact of yaw. The critical yaw,
which determined the yaw at which level of penetration was reduced as a
result, differs between the L/D10 and L/D30 rods. From this research it
can be inferred that the two different sized projectiles differ in
aerodynamic performance. As such, if yaw is to be a possible defeat
method, the L/D, not just length, must be considered. Table ‎2‑3 has
taken a sample of the LRPs formerly identified and prescribed the length
and diameters.

Table ‎2‑3 Summary of L/D data

  Name     Length(mm)   Diameter   Country   References
  -------- ------------ ---------- --------- -------------------------
  OFL F2   594          27         France    (Jane’s Defence, 2019c)
  DM88     745          38         Germany   (Jane’s Defence, 2019d)
  M829A1   684          22         USA       (Jane’s Defence, 2019e)
  M829A3   684          22         USA       (Jane’s Defence, 2019e)
  125-1    554          28         China     (Jane’s Defence, 2019g)

This data has been displayed as L/D in Figure ‎2‑6, which demonstrates
where these LRPs sit in relation to L/D10 and L/D30 standards. It then
defines a normalised value, which can then be used throughout the
remainder of the research.

[A screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically generated]

  Figure ‎2‑6 Plot of Length/Diameter

Baseline LRP Characteristics

This literature review of LRP’s has defined a series of characteristics,
which can be used as a baseline for the remainder of the research. These
facts have been formed from a mean and therefore present a reasonable
assumption from which to base experiments. These characteristics are
displayed in Table ‎2‑4 below:

  Table ‎2‑4 Summary of LRP baseline characteristics

  Ser.   Characteristic   Value
  ------ ---------------- ---------
  1      Range mid        1551m
  2      Range high       1990m
  3      Range low        840m
  4      Speed            1664m/s
  5      Length           607mm
  6      Diameter         25mm
  7      L/D              24

Literature review APS

The second component of the literature review will be to understand
current and emerging APS capabilities. The review will focus on
identifying the characteristics relevant to the research platform:
sensors and effectors, whilst also identifying methods by which APS
could defeat LRPs. It will aim to define the most relevant sub-systems
within each area, which will then be explored in greater detail within
the later sections of the research. The lack of inherent guidance within
an LRP denies the use of soft-kill systems as a defeat mechanism. Whilst
it is accepted that certain capabilities such as Laser Directed Energy
Weapons (LDEW) could be employed pre-emptively to defeat sighting
systems. These methods, however, do not contribute to the defeat of the
projectile and therefore sit outside the scope of the research.

Review of current active protection methods

The list of APS reviewed within this section is not exhaustive, however
the research aims to analyse the different sensor and effectors
combinations used to generate an effect. It must also be noted that the
emerging nature of many modern APS, often makes the classification of
their composition above the level of this paper.

Table ‎2‑5 List of reviewed APS

  Ser.   Name                                                         Effector                                                       Sensor
  ------ ------------------------------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1      Rheinmetall Active Defence System. (Jane’s Defence, 2019h)   Non fragmentary blast                                          Phased Array Radar pre-warner and IR collision detection.
  2      Rafael Trophy (Keller, 2018).                                Multiple Explosively Formed Projectiles (MEFP) (Rocco, 2018)   Phased Array Doppler Radar (Hazell, 2016).
  3.     IMI Iron Fist (Jane’s Defence, 2019i).                       Explosive charge interceptors.                                 Phased Array Radar pre-warner and IR collision detection (Allison, 2018).
  4.     KBM Arena (Hazell, 2016).                                    Directed Fragmentation Grenade (Jane’s Defence, 2019j)         Constant scan radar (Meyer, 1998b)

Rheinmetall ADS

The Rheinmetall ADS (Jane’s Defence, 2019h) was first tested in 2011 on
a Fuchs 8x8. It has been designed to defeat missile and rocket systems
and as such uses short range detectors and a non-fragmentary effector.
The sensors are two staged, an initial detection by passive radar at
10-35m from the platform, then a collision sensor by an IR detector
about 2m from the platform. This provides the platform with 200-80ms
from detection and between 20-15ms for collision. Whilst this processing
time is extremely fast, it is insufficient for the defeat of an LRP,
which could travel at over 6.5x the speed. The effector is based on a
shape-charge, which is though not to include a liner, thus reducing
collateral damage, which is a key sales point given the system is
designed for lighter platforms (Rheinmetall Defence, 2019). The shape
charge initiates a blast wave which in-turn defeats the projectile. As
with the sensor system, the effector is insufficient for an LRP, it is
unlikely that the effector would defeat in time or have the power, if it
did, to defeat it.

Raphael Trophy

The Raphael Trophy system is a widely used system, integrated onto the
Israeli Merkava Tank and being developed for the US Abrams M1A2 (Keller,
2018). The system aims to defeat ATGMs and rockets upto 30m away through
the use of a phased array doppler radar, similar to the ADS (Hazell,
2016). The MEFPs are mounted on either one or two gimballed launchers
(Rocco, 2018). The advantage of EFP effectors, is the large range at
which they can affect a projectile. In this system the MEFPs are closely
grouped and as such they could be used to induce dispersion, accounting
for inaccuracies or high velocity rounds. The gimballed launcher, whilst
reducing the weight of the system does generate additional latency into
the engagement sequence. For the effector to be able to acquire the
target and achieve coincidence, the threat will need to be detected
significantly further away that the ADS currently does.

Israeli Military Industries (IMI) Iron Fist

The IMI Iron Fist system is a combination of the two former systems. It
employs a twin phased sensor system, radar to detect and passive IR to
initiate, claiming a reaction time of between 300-350ms (Jane’s Defence,
2019i). It then uses a small interceptor projectile, seen at Figure
‎2‑7, which is launched and then detonated (Allison, 2018) to form an
explosive shock at a distance of approximately 15m from the platform.
The manufacturer claims that the system is capable of defeating Kinetic
Energy (KE) rounds (General Dynamics OTS, 2011). The specific round is
not explicitly stated, and whilst Jane’s Defence has claimed to see the
effector defeat a KE round, the full detect-effect has not been
demonstrated against this threat. If the 350ms reaction time is correct,
the baseline projectile from this research would need to be detected at
a range greater than 582m. Although this is technically feasible, the
use of radar to permanently scan at this range would generate a very
large signature for the platform, therefore, even if it system is
capable of defeating a KE round, it may not be practical to do so.

[]

  Figure ‎2‑7 Iron Fist projectile pictured just before detonation in
  the defeat of an RPG-7 projectile. (General Dynamics OTS, 2011).

KBM Arena

The KBM Arena system is one of the oldest systems in this review,
originally developed in 1997, but was last updated in 2010 (Jane’s
Defence, 2019j). It uses a continuous scan radar mounted prominently on
the centre of the turret. It detects targets up to 50m away (Meyer,
1998b) and between 70 and 700m/s (Jane’s Defence, 2019j). The effector
is a fragmentation grenade which is launched up to a range of 1.5m from
the platform. At which it will detonate, forming a cone of fragmentation
in the direction of the target. Projectiles are usually engaged at 4m
from the platform, but despite this close range, the danger area for
fragmentation is between 20 and 30m (Meyer, 1998b), as a result of the
cone angle of the fragmentation. This makes the system difficult to
operate in the vicinity of dismounts or urban areas.

APS Analysis

This selection of current APS were chosen as they each use a different
sensor/effector combination to defeat their target. The next section
focuses on the characteristics and subsequent analysis of some of these
key combinations and components, defining the implications of particular
combinations on the engagement itself.

Twinned sensor array

Both ADS and Iron Fist (Allison, 2018) use two layered sensor types to
identify a target/initiate the system and then initiate the effector,
respectively. This type of system adds an element of redundancy and also
ensures that the system is only fully activated when a projectile is
detected (Rheinmetall Defence, 2019). The final stage detector is
particularly interesting, it removes the requirement for an accurate
Projectile Intercept Point (PIP) to be calculated from the first stage
sensor. In theory this should reduce processing time and therefore the
reaction time, as shown by the ADS, but not necessarily the Iron Fist.
It must however be noted that the effector for Iron Fist does not
necessitate a short reaction time in the same way as ADS. This sensor
array and not using an accurate PIP may be the reason why both ADS and
Iron Fist have used an area rather than precision effector, such as an
EFP.

Engaging at reach

Trophy (Keller, 2018) and Iron Fist both aim to engage the target at
beyond 10m, and up to 30m for Trophy, as shown in Figure ‎2‑8. This
additional stand-off would deny the remnants of a shaped charge from
striking the target, even if the jet was unhindered by the defeat
mechanism (Miyoshi et al., 2005), this is likely to be even more
effective against slower projectiles such as fragmentation. As a result,
it can be seen that this stand-off increases the effectiveness of the
defeat mechanism. The range has an additional effect, it provides the
distance required to use yaw induction as a method of projectile defeat
(Rocco, 2018). This additional distance, whilst affording improved
platform protection, does significantly increase the collateral
implications of the system. The implication of the MEFP effector
launching to 30m from the platform, denies its use in complex
environments, such as the urban, or on vehicles designed to operate in
the vicinity of dismounted troops, such as Armoured Personnel Carriers
(APCs). Arena (Jane’s Defence, 2019j) also suffers from this
implication, although its effects range is up to 4m, the choice of a
fragmentation effector creates a very large danger area around the
platform. This significantly limits the systems utility and flexibility.

[]

Figure ‎2‑8 Diagram showing a comparison of engagement ranges between
the aforementioned systems

Residual impact

The ADS demonstrates a system which requires a significant amount of
residual armour (Rocco, 2018). Whilst developing a system with low
collateral damage and a minimal defeat range it will still detonate the
projectile within 2m of the platform (Rheinmetall Defence, 2019).
Without sufficient passive armour, the projectile will still cause
significant damage. Despite being marketed towards the light vehicle
market, this denies this system to a large proportion of those vehicles.
This is a key justification for the separation of APS and the target
platform, the greater the separation the less the effects on the
protected vehicle.

Multiple engagements

One area of concern within the systems that have been reviewed is the
ability to conduct multiple engagements and the ability to conduct them
sequentially in close proximity. One of the key developments in
defeating APS has been to launch two projectiles in quick succession
(Mizokami, 2018), a system such as Arena, with its 2.4s re-engagement
time (Meyer, 1998a) would be unable to mitigate this threat. Whilst this
is focussed primarily on the defeat of ATGMs, if an LRP defeating APS
was developed, this could also be a simple and effective countermeasure.
Similarly systems such as Iron Fist only have the limited number of
projectiles before they must be reloaded, the Iron Fist Light system
only carries two projectiles on each side of the platform, despite
weighing 325kg (General Dynamics OTS, 2011). The system weight may
justify why the number of projectiles is so limited, especially given
its intent to be mounted on lighter platforms. With the addition of
updated passive armour, the active system platforms are often operating
well above their initial combat weight. To some degree, this can be
mitigated by sacrificing some of the passive armour for active, but
whilst the span of threats still involves kinetic energy rounds, an
element of passive armour will have to remain. Space may also be a
factor as the number of places where the launcher can be placed, and not
impact on other systems, is limited (see Figure ‎2‑9.)

[A picture containing object, telescope, sky, outdoor Description
automatically generated] [A picture containing vehicle, transport, boat,
ship Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎2‑9 Iron Fist Light Launcher module (General Dynamics OTS,
2011).

Target set

It is important to acknowledge that all of the systems reviewed, with
the exception of Iron Fist, have been designed to defeat ATGM threats.
With Iron Fist, there is still some discussion as to the definition of
‘Kinetic Round’ used by the company (General Dynamics OTS, 2011). A
specific definition of the target projectile doesn’t exist within their
open source literature, but it does not implicitly define the kinetic
energy round as an LRP, this ambiguity could be deliberate to favour a
marketing strategy. Whilst the effector range and method could be
feasible, there no evidence to prove that the system processing time is
sufficient. As a result, there is no conclusive evidence to suggest that
any of the systems above could defeat an LRP.

LRP defeat methods

Whilst the APS’s reviewed within this paper did not present a conclusive
method of defeating the LRP, there has been limited research into
methods of defeating the projectile. This section will review the two
key approaches: fragmentation and yaw.

Fragmentation

Liden, 2010 studies the interaction between penetrators and moving
armour components specifically focussing on LRPs. One of the most
pertinent experiments looked at the interaction between an LRP and a
moving plate and identified two findings relevant to this study. The
first was that fragmentation occurs best when there is an interaction
with the nose and side of the projectile. From this it could be inferred
that a plate, such as in Explosive Reactive Armour (ERA), is more
effective than a single impact point. This can be further developed by
identifying that if single point projectiles are used, multiples of
these might be required to achieve fragmentation. This is best
demonstrated in Figure ‎2‑10, where the greatest level of stress is seen
when the side of the projectile interacts with the plate.

[A close up of a map Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎2‑10 Sequences of damage plot during the interaction with a
forward/backwards moving plate (Liden, 2010)

The second and arguably most relevant factor was that the propensity for
the LRP to fragment was significantly increased when a plate moving in
the same direction as the LRP, rather than directly against it (Liden,
2010). This is largely the result of a delay in the interaction of the
plate and the side of the projectile, inducing even greater stress, than
immediately interacting with the side. Whilst this theory cannot apply
to conventional APS, the concept in this paper could utilise its
separation from the platform to increase the fragmentation probability
by matching effector and projectile direction.

In a later study by the same author(Liden, Helte and Andersson, 2016) it
was concluded that the break up tendency of an LRP was primarily related
to the shearing force generated by the sliding interaction between the
penetrator and the plate. This has a difficult application for APS, as
sliding plates may be a difficult effector to implement due to size and
weight. To follow on from this work Rocco et al 2018 further developed
this concept to define how a single point of interaction could generate
fragmentation of an LRP (Rocco, 2018). The paper estimated that it would
take 3300J of energy to defeat a 25.4mm diameter LRP. It could also be
seen that all the impacts during the experiment were central to the
projectile, which may be difficult to achieve outside of laboratory
conditions, nonetheless guarantee it as a method of defeat.

Yaw induction

During the research by Rocco it was also identified that although the
rod did not consistently fracture, it did consistently move within its
jig (Rocco, 2018). Yaw rate was measured throughout the experiment to
understand the residual effects of the projectile, but actually
demonstrated a defeat mechanism in its own right. This claim in
supported by other research, most notably by Liden and Helte who
recommended deflection as an effective alternative to fragmentation
(Lidén and Helte, 2016). When analysed, it can be seen that an increase
in kinetic energy does not significantly increase the yaw rate, until
the point at which fragmentation occurs. Secondly, the yaw angle
increases exponentially with distance travelled. Table ‎2‑6 shows the
data generated from the experiments.

Table ‎2‑6 Yaw angle at certain distances (Rocco, 2018)

[]

When modelled against a platform, it was shown that a non-fragmented
projectile could avoid a 2.5m high vehicle, if it is engaged at 7m from
the platform or 2.75m if the projectile does fragment. Whilst it does
demonstrate a method of defeating the projectile, this is based on a
constant value for yaw rate. The value used for yaw in this calculation
is an average; in order to mitigate this the data has been further
modelled into Figure ‎2‑11. This model demonstrates the cumulative
distance at which the projectile would have yawed, at set ranges from
the vehicle. This will ensure that the optimum engagement distance can
be established for the engagement of an LRP using yaw as a defeat
mechanism. It is important to note that when the data is represented in
this manner, cumulatively, rather than an average yaw angle, the
intercept range slightly changes. For the projectile to yaw enough to
avoid a platform 2.5m tall, the projectile must be intercepted atleast
9m from the platform, not the 7m previously stated. This is the result
of the polynomial rather than linear curve.

[A close up of a map Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎2‑11 Rocco yaw angle data plotted cumulatively

A key benefit of separating the APS and the platform is the ability to
engage a projectile at a much greater distance than current systems can.
To understand how greater distances than within the current data-set
might affect the yaw potential, a polynomial regression machine learning
algorithm was used. This model suggests to have a very low probability
of error, however, the small data-set could make this deceptively
accurate. The model also assumes that the projectile is impacted
centrally and that there are no further effects on the aerodynamics of
the LRP. This model is shown in Figure ‎2‑12, the intercept range and
the yaw distance are exponentially related. Therefore, a small increase
in range could generate a significant increase in protection, but a too
greater increase could mean the projectile generates additional
collateral damage implications. The further that the projectile yaws
from its target, the greater the likelihood that the projectile will
interact with another entity in the battlespace. If the projectile yaws
laterally this could interact with a lighter vehicle, which it may still
penetrate. Perhaps more concerning would be a vertical yaw, which might
cause an interaction with an aircraft, especially a helicopter. The yaw
data may be highly relevant when identifying feasible positions for the
APS platform, so that it is able to protect its objective, without
causing harm to other platforms or personnel. Whilst this poses a
significant challenge for the use of yaw as a defeat method, it still
presents the most reliable method of LRP defeat with an active system.
Methods of mitigating this area will be analysed in greater detail,
later sections of the research.

[A close up of a device Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎2‑12 Yaw angle prediction using polynomial regression

Concept Requirements

To summarise this literature review, a number of system requirements for
the APS platform can be developed. These requirements combine the
effects of the constraints identified within this section. They form a
baseline which defines the parameters of the experimentation within the
following sections. Similarly, they will act as a measure of
effectiveness for the concept itself, identifying if it remains feasible
as the research develops. Table ‎2‑7 compiles a list of the concept
requirements.

Table ‎2‑7 Summary of Concept Requirements

  No   Requirement
  ---- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1.   The system should seek to use yaw rather than fragmentation as a defeat method.
  2.   The system should seek to defeat LRPs fired from 840m, 1550m and 1990m to replicate the most likely ranges.
  3.   The system must impact the incoming projectile at greater than 9m from the platform, thus generating sufficient yaw to protect the objective.
  4.   The system must be able to defeat a projectile travelling at 1664m/s.
  5.   The system must mitigate or account for the effects of Aerodynamic Jump on the trajectory of an LRP.
  6.   The effector must be able to transfer >3300J of energy to the projectile.

DETECT THE THREAT

This section of the paper will focus on defining the possible methods
that the platform could use to detect, recognise and predict the
flightpath of threats to the protected platform. Whilst this component
does not directly relate to the effector interaction, the primary focus
of this paper, it is fundamental to understanding the parameters which
enable the effector to operate. A critical factor will be that of time.
The minimum time required to predict an intercept point between effector
and projectile will directly relate to the minimum engagement range for
which the APS will protect. With a projectile capable of completing a
mean range engagement in 0.93s, this will be challenging. This section
will initially establish the requirements, then assess potential sensor
options before defining methods of processing to minimise the data
processing time. The outcome of the section will be a model which can be
used to form the baseline for the effector research.

Sensor Requirements

The requirements for this system initially seem very similar to
in-service APS, as examined in Section ‎2.2. However, by defining the
LRP as the primary target set, the system has a far more complex demand.
The first challenge is the projectile itself. Its high-speed, results in
an extremely short time for system to both identify and process a
threat. The small diameter of the projectile, its lack of guidance and
kinetic propulsion, means there is unlikely to be much projectile
signature after the initial consequences of firing.

The second challenge is the defeat mechanism, in order to induce yaw
effectively it will require significant energy being applied directly to
the projectile. David Rocco predicted that the energy required to induce
this yaw was 3300J (Rocco, 2018). For context, to generate 3300J of
kinetic energy, a 2kg object to be travelling at 127mph. In addition, if
the projectile must be struck from at least 9m away from the platform
then the interception point must either be very accurate, or the
effector must be broad. Trophy APS (Keller, 2018) already aims to engage
at 30m from the platform, however, the ATGM target set it faces is
significantly larger and slower than an LRP. This means, the APS
solution used by Trophy cannot correlate directly.

A final, and often overlooked challenge, is the impact of an active
sensor on the signature of the platform. Minimising this through the use
of passive systems where possible, will ensure that the platform does
not inadvertently decrease the survivability of the protectee by
emitting a unique signature. In light of these challenges, the system
sensors have three key requirements:

-   Detect at the greatest range possible, therefore providing maximum
    time and capitalising on the firing signature.

-   Speed

-   Accuracy

Overall, the system sensors are required to achieve three separate tasks
which will provide sufficient data to enable the effector interception.
The tasks are: track the protectee, detect the threat and track the
threat. A demonstration of these is shown in Figure ‎3‑1.

[]

Figure ‎3‑1 Engagement sequence

 Track the Protectee

This system could be used to defend a single vehicle or a small group,
if co-located. For the purpose of the paper, the protectee will be
defined as a single vehicle, this will prove its feasibility against the
simpler challenge, which can then be further developed into multiple
vehicles. The platform has to understand its position in relation to the
protected vehicle. This enables the system to determine whether an
engagement is targeting its protectee and that it positioned correctly
to provide the required protection. This type of control is already in
existence with follow-me mode on commercial UAS (Mao et al., 2017).
Operation in air, however, rather than land is simpler as inherently it
has infinite degrees of freedom. This type of guidance has however been
demonstrated through source seeking with three degrees of freedom
(Paliotta, Belleter and Pettersen, 2015) and through the use of image
distance processing angular velocity calculation (Poonawala, Satici and
Spong, 2013). There are multiple sensor options, which provide the data
which enables this calculation. This task is different to the other two
and therefore its requirements are based upon; the possible separation
between platform and protectee; then the ability to generate accurate
relative locations. These requirements will be used to assess three
possible options.

IR Beacons

IR beacons are commonly used by leading ‘follow me’ UAS and are proved
to be highly effective (Amraii et al., 2014). An IR beacon would
however, need to transmit routinely and thus may present a very unique
signature that could be clearly identified by other IR scanners.
Similarly, an IR beacon relies upon line of sight which will limit the
range in which the two platforms can separate. It is therefore assessed
that an IR beacon would not be appropriate for this application.

Visual detection

Advances in image processing using Artificial Neural Networks have
demonstrated that they are capable of AFV recognition from Satellite or
Synthetic Aperture Radar images (Abd Ghani and Yosri, 2011). The
algorithms are capable of subtracting the background and then analysing
a platform shape through a wireframe reconstruction, enabling its
identity to be determined (Hadi, Sulong and George, 2014). A drawback of
machine learning is the time taken to train an algorithm. However, once
the algorithm has been trained, detection could be virtually
instantaneous (Herwig and Schalkoff, 2015) and has been noted to have a
90% success rate (Vaitheeswaran, Bharath and Gokul, 2014). Difficulty of
this approach arises if the platform had to dynamically change the
protectee to one not within the training data-set. This could be
overcome by the simple application of a unique identifier, such as a
Quick Recognition (QR) code (Gu and Zhang, 2011), which is already
common place in most modern mobile phones. A similar code could be
placed on any platform that the system would need to defend, noting that
the image processing can account for tilt or obliquity. The uniformed
size of the QR code would also serve to provide the range of the vehicle
using a stadiometric calculation, though its accuracy would have to be
tested. Similarly, if multiple codes were used to denote the different
sides of a platform, then this could be used to triangulate its
orientation. The benefit of image processing is that it is inherently
passive and therefore generates no signature, however, if it was to use
near-IR sensor the QR codes would be required to generate a small
signature. Whilst again this presents a viable option for developing the
correct range and angle, it is by definition reliant upon line-of-sight.

Differential Global Positional Satellite (DGPS) and Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU). 

To mitigate the complications of line of sight, some systems, such as
the Packbot, have been equipped with a DGPS (Borenstein et al., 2010).
This enables the Packbot to follow its leader through a breadcrumb trail
left by the leader’s GPS. The GPS method prevents the issue of line of
sight and presents a method of enabling the two platforms to manoeuvre
with more freedom. However, traditional GPS is prone to variation, to
mitigate this DGPS can be used, by providing an initial known point the
error within the GPS can be minimised (Chivers, 2019). This is designed
to calibrate the GPS to a known point, which may not always be feasible
on a dynamic battlefield. If the platform was instead calibrated when
located with the protectee, the error could be mutually offset, thus
improving accuracy. Another complication is the prevalence of GPS denial
as peer adversaries continue to invest in the technology (Watling and
Bronk, 2019). Denial is commonly countered with an IMU, however if
uncorrected these can be vulnerable to drift as shown in Figure ‎3‑2
(Borenstein et al., 2010). A visual reference systems has been
successful at mitigating this error (Kim and Golnaraghi, 2004). Whilst
image processing was not the method used, it demonstrates that visual
correlation is possible. This demonstrates that IMU and image processing
complement each other; when combined they may enable a very accurate and
resilient method of tracking the protectee.

[A close up of a map Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎3‑2 The recorded paths of a leader-follower, displaying both a
corrected and an uncorrected IMU, highlighting the impact of IMU drift.
(Borenstein et al., 2010)

No single sensor method presented here gives a full solution to the
problem, as such layering sensors would produce the most reliable
outcome. As such, image processing, DGPS and IMU presents a
complimentary and effective method of leader-follower control. Image
processing generates accurate line of sight data; DGPS then presents a
solution for operating beyond visual range, in which redundancy is then
generated by the IMU. Ultimately using a system like this means that the
platform can generate angle and range to a sufficient accuracy, whilst
not imposing any manoeuvre restrictions on either platform. Technically,
its feasibility can be demonstrated by examining the MBDA MMP, which
incorporates an IMU (MBDA Missile Systems, 2018), integration into such
a small package would suggest that weight and power concerns will not be
a factor. This will maximise available engagement time against an LRP.

Detect the Threat. 

Sensing the projectile is broken into two phases, the first of which is
the detection of the projectile launch. This phase is enduring
throughout the deployment of the platform and concludes at the point a
direct threat to the protectee is identified. The sensor system must
both identify a potential launch and then match the trajectory to the
protected platforms location, thus confirming its threat classification,
not a separate event. The sensor, however, does not need to be able to
generate an intercept point, this is conducted in the tracking phase and
enables more latitude in its accuracy. This phase presents two clear
challenges. Firstly, to generate sufficient time to process the threat,
the target has to be detected at the greatest possible range, up to
1990m. Secondly, the persistent nature of the sensor requires it to be
passive as not to generate permanent signature. As a result, there are
two options, image processing and passive radar.

 Image Processing

As with the Section ‎3.1.1.2, the use of machine learning algorithms
could provide an effective, passive method of detecting the threat.
There are two possible methods of detection using these means:

-   Method 1: Detect the signature around the shot and then relate it to
    the orientation of the firing platform.

-   Method 2: Compare two image frames of the projectile and correlate
    the direction of the projectile to the location of the protected
    platform.

Method 1 would be the quickest and simplest method and would generate a
sufficient enough output. The method would rely on some assumptions:
that the barrel is central to the platform, the platform type is within
the dataset and the platform is in the line of sight. The first two
assumptions are easily satisfied as currently all LRPs are fired from a
similar platform, a tank. The final assumption is more challenging,
although the barrel and sight must be in line of sight, other
environmental clutter may interfere with the identification of the
platform. Figure ‎3‑3 shows how this method could detect, without the
requirement to identify the platform. If the centre of mass of the shot
(green line) sits central to the platform, or shot signature, within a
margin of error (white shade) then it could be considered a viable
threat. If the exposed area is only partially visible, it could cause a
discrepancy, but this could be mitigated by using clutter removal
algorithms (Hadi, Sulong and George, 2014).

[A picture containing train Description automatically generated][A
picture containing object Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎3‑3 Visual representation of method 1 against the platform and
shot signature.

All current LRPs rely upon discarding their sabot, generating a
significant and very unique signature. Due to its symmetric nature it
could be used to define the threat direction, as seen in Figure ‎3‑4.
Method 2 would use this characteristic to identify a threat. If the
projectile is being fired towards the protected platform the petals
would be symmetrically distributed. It has been identified that although
sabot separation starts upon the projectile leaving the barrel, it takes
4.9ms for the separation to be fully achieved (Cayzac, Carette and
Alziary de Roquefort, 2001). The time taken for an image to be processed
is entirely dependent upon the algorithm selected and the supporting
power. Some algorithms have claimed to process 650 images/second and
have upwards of 90% accuracy (De Albuquerque et al., 2012). In effect
this is real-time processing and if it is achieved it would enable the
system to process images from multiple sensors simultaneously, thus
enabling a broad arc of observation. The other advantage to machine
learning is that the model will grow and adapt as engagements are
experienced. This could mean that the algorithm may identify additional
consequences of firing to trigger detection. This method assumes that
the firing sequence is within line of sight, but given the dumb and
direct nature of an LRP, this is a reasonable assumption

[]

Figure ‎3‑4 Directional view of an LRP sabot discarding (Huang, Wessam
and Chen, 2014)

Passive Radar

Passive radar uses echoes existing radiation within an environment to
detect a moving object by detecting its Doppler shift. Although the
technology is still developing, it presents an affordable and reliable
method of radar detection without the emission signature of a
conventional system (Limnaios et al., 2019). Trial data is primarily
based around the air domain, but some trials have been conducted
demonstrating that a target travelling at 0.5mach can be detected at
1.1km (Limnaios et al., 2019), whilst this does not meet the parameters
required yet, it shows promise. One area of development for passive
radars is in clutter reduction (Colone, Cardinali and Lombardo, 2006),
which could significantly increase its performance in the ground domain.
One drawback to passive radar is that it is inherently reliant upon
external signals to generate detections, such as phone or radio signals.
However, it can be assumed that the modern battlefield will still
contain a high level of data transmissions such as Radio Frequency (RF)
transmissions, which could be utilised (Limnaios et al., 2019).
Furthermore, another area of passive radar research are methods to
maximise the existing signals (Karthik and Blum, 2018). The signal
generator does add an additional factor into the time calculation, but
given the signal will still travel at the speed of light it is highly
unlikely that the increase in time will have any impact on the detection
of a projectile. The lack of signature attributed to passive radar means
that, if integrated, the platform could detect projectiles entirely
passively. This is, however, dependent upon a relevant and available
signal, which cannot always be guaranteed, especially when operating
within a contested EMS. This paper recognises that in order to fully
assess the viability of passive radar, much greater detail must be
understood, this detail is held at a classification out of scope for
this paper. Using the known statistics of passive radar, as a sensor it
may be better suited to a closer range tracking of a threat, rather than
detection.

Modelling

For the purpose of modelling we will use the greatest time that we have
examined, being the use of method 2 for image processing. This assumes
that the other two approaches would take less time. This requires 4.9ms
for separation to complete and 0.15ms for processing to occur, with
rounding this generates a 5.1ms time for detection. The diagram at
Figure ‎3‑5 shows the time available for engagements at each of the
chosen ranges, denoted by the solid red, green and blue lines. The light
blue shaded area details the detection component of the sequence.

[]

Figure ‎3‑5 Engagement sequence model showing engagement time (s)[2]
engagements at each of the chosen ranges (red, green and blue lines
respectively), the detection time is highlighted by the light blue
shaded area.

Track the Threat. 

The final stage of the sensor sequence is to track the threat. This is
the most complex stage of the process as it needs to enable the
processor to deduce an accurate intercept point for the effector. This
section will evaluate the requirements for the system and evaluate the
possible methods of meeting them. It must be acknowledged that the
sensor and effector in this situation are inextricably linked, as a
result multiple options will be taken forward and refined against
effectors. Unlike detecting the threat, in Section ‎3.1.2, tracking the
threat is a discreet activity and therefore does not need to be
constrained by the limits of a passive system. To enable the system to
effectively track a threat the sensor will need to achieve the following
criteria which all of the sensors will be judged against:

-   Ability to accurately generate the data required to enable the
    system to define the impact point. This would require the following
    metrics: time from detection to interception (∂), horizontal
    distance (x) and elevation angle (α) as displayed in the diagram at
    Figure ‎3‑6.

-   Be capable of initiating (if required), then accurately generating
    the above metrics within enough time to enable an effector to
    interact with the projectile, whilst it remains greater than 9m from
    the intended target. Using the model at Figure ‎3‑5, at the three
    test distances the sensors have only 0.448s, 0.875s and 1.139s
    respectively. These times do not account for the effector time of
    flight, meaning they may reduce.

[A close up of a map Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎3‑6 Interception calculation data requirement diagram

The requirement for a passive system was constraining, by removing this,
the opportunities for sensors have broadened. As stated, passive radar
may be suited better to track than detect, therefore this section
examines three additional options. The ultimate aim is to assess the
sensors against the criteria previously established and define a sample
time that can be added to the model. This will prove the feasibility of
the concept at each range and the time remaining will support the
selection of the effector.

Radar.

Millimetric wave radar (MWR) is often used within APS as its low
wavelength supports an accurate identification of the threat (Hazell,
2016). Its high resolution has been demonstrated to be effective against
systems with a low radar cross section, such as micro-Unmanned Air
Vehicles (UAVs) (Ezuma et al., 2019) Rheinmetall ADS detects a threat
using MWR up to 35m from the platform and engages at 2m (Rheinmetall
Defence, 2019). If assumed that the APS is designed to target ATGMs
travelling at ~250m/s then the maximum reaction time can be calculated
as 132ms. If this reaction time is taken as a processing constant, when
applied to an LRP, then the projectile would need to be detected at a
minimum of 220m from the target. A Frequency Modulated Continuous Wave
radar at 57-64GHz wave was used to detect a 7.62mm round travelling at
850m/s, at 200m from the sensor (Shoykhetbrod, Hommes and Pohl, 2014).
Whilst the speed is only half the test speed of the LRP model, the
increase in size and the inclusion of fins would suggest the LRP has a
higher Radar Cross Section when compared to the 7.62 round (Zaman and
Matin, 2012). As a result of this, this paper will assume MWR to be a
technically viable option. One significant drawback of MWR is that
weather has a significant impact on its performance, if used in a fog
with 0.5m visibility, the attenuation of the radar would be 10%, 3db out
of 30db, (Golovachev et al., 2018) this could be extrapolated directly
to define the degree of accuracy. Given the time and speed that this
system would have to operate within this inaccuracy may render it
ineffective. So, although MWR may be technically feasible, its
attenuation may make it practically unfeasible.

Other radar wavelengths may however, present a viable method of
detection. The system could use any radar system with a wavelength less
than the diameter of the projectile. If, for example, a 15mm wavelength
was chosen, this would increase the range, reduce attenuation and still
be capable of detecting the projectile. By nature, a radar will generate
a significant signature. The radar range equation at

Equation ‎3‑1 demonstrates that wavelength, antenna gain, power and
target radar-cross section (RCS) are directly related to range. The
target RCS is small, so the other variables must compensate. As the
wavelength and power increases, so will its vulnerability to detection.
This does not inherently prevent the use of radar, but it must be
balanced with the power and wavelength selected. If radar is used, a gap
in long range projectile tracking may be an acceptable sacrifice to
minimise the signature.

$$R_{\text{Max}} = \ \sqrt[4]{\frac{P_{\text{s\ }}G^{2}\lambda^{2}\sigma}{P_{e_{\min}}(4\pi)^{3}}}$$

(Wolff, 2020)

  Equation ‑ Radar range equation

R_(Max) = maximum range

P_(s ) = transmitted power

G= antenna gain

λ = wavelength

σ = radar cross-section [m²]

P_(e_(min) )= min received power

Image Processing.

Unlike the previous uses of image processing, accurately predicting the
projectile path is more challenging. The diameter of the actual
projectile, between 20-30mm, makes it very difficult to distinguish the
projectile from the background after the initial signature of firing. As
a result, passive infra-red may present a better input source. The
second challenge is generating accurate predicted locations from an
image, which inherently lacks the context of location. One study (Ullah,
Song and Kirubarajan, 2015) has trialled the use of twinned sensors,
which are separated enough to generate a location by triangulation, as
shown in Figure ‎3‑7.

[A picture containing sky Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎3‑7 Azimuth and elevation triangulation using multiple IR
sensors (Ullah, Song and Kirubarajan, 2015)

This method was able to detect a 1000m/s projectile at 1000m, though it
is noted that the signal irradiance above 500m, made accurate
predictions difficult. Therefore, given the small signature of the
projectile it is likely that it would not be detected beyond this point.
It could be assumed that this range may reduce, accounting for the
additional projectile speed. The study also demonstrated that the
distance between the two sensors had a significant impact on the
accuracy of prediction. The accuracy improves exponentially as the
distance increases from 1m to 4m (Ullah, Song and Kirubarajan, 2015).
The platform, as a UGV, will be intentionally small it may therefore not
be able to achieve more than a 2m separation, which may impact on its
accuracy. The study does not detail to what accuracy the projectile was
predicted, but given the identification is at ~500m, it may not be
accurate enough to generate a sufficient intercept point for an effector
such as an MEFP. However, its additional reach, over MWR, may provide
enough time for effectors to slew to an approximate location. If layered
with MWR, it would provide an effective and complimentary sequence.

Laser.

The final sensor is Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR). Operating in a
similar way to radar, light, often in the form of a laser, is emitted
and the reflection is detection. LIDAR has become very popular in the
field of autonomy, as a method of exteroceptive navigation (Papadakis,
2013) and hazard detection (Pang et al., 2019). The area is often broken
into Flash and Time of Flight (ToF) systems, in effect Flash systems
take a snapshot and ToF systems consistently scan (Kim and Park, 2016).
For target detection, a Flash system with a high refresh rate is
probably best suited, as the cone of detection can be narrowed to a
margin of error and the volume of data to analyse is minimised.
Commercial Flash LIDAR, such as the LeddarTech Vu8 (Vu and Lidar, 2020)
is capable of detecting to 215m with a refresh rate of 100hz. Whilst
this paper accepts far better LIDAR capabilities exist, these figures
establish a baseline. As a result of these figures, and LIDARs high
granularity, it is suggested that LIDAR would make an effective
short-range sensor, which would initiate the effector. Using the
baseline speed, this would detect the projectile 130ms / 216m from
impact.

Developing the intercept point.

All of the above sensors are able to generate azimuth and elevation data
but fall short of generating an accurate interception point
individually. Using a machine learning algorithm could enable the system
to integrate the output of multiple sensors, maximising their individual
benefits and mitigating the weaknesses. By combining the sensor outputs,
the processor is able to pre-empt potential intercepts early in the
projectiles flight and continually adjust accordingly. This has two
distinct benefits:

1.  Early prediction of an estimated intercept enables an effector
    launcher to be aligned earlier in the firing process, with only
    smaller adjustments being required as the prediction is improved.
    This is especially relevant within this scenario where mechanical
    servos may struggle to slew in time.

2.  Minimise the error within intercept predictions by generating a
    larger sample size, therefore accounting for flightpath or speed
    variances, such as Aerodynamic Jump as described in Figure ‎2‑1.
    This would not be possible using a speed, distance, time calculation
    on its own.

This could be achieved by taking data points generated by each sensor
and combining them into the overall processing model. The
characteristics of LRP, primarily trajectory, lack of guidance and
consistent speed makes a simple linear regression algorithm (Eremenko
and de Ponteves, 2020a) well suited to calculating a range and time
intercept. A simple linear regression algorithm uses the relationship
between multiple samples of a dependant and an independent variable to
predict the unknown values by drawing a straight line between the values
(Eremenko and de Ponteves, 2020a). By using a machine learning
algorithm, the linear regression is able to adapt and retrain the model
to reflect new data. As a result, as the number of datapoints increases
so does the accuracy of the predictions. The difference between a time
intercept calculation with a low number data points and one with a high
number can be seen in Figure ‎3‑8, it displays a difference in algorithm
predicted time with two and six data points respectively, and the number
of datapoints makes the second graph significantly more accurate.

[A screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically generated][A
screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎3‑8 Linear regression algorithm showing relationship between
distance from the platform and time of flight. The blue shows a line of
best fit around the datapoints, in red, the green shows predicted values
calculated by linear regression. The left hand graph shows a zero
intercept at ~0.88 and the right hand at ~1.03

One challenge to using this method will be the generation of sufficient
data points to produce an accurate model to ensure the effector
interacts with the projectile. Layering sensors could provide small
clusters of data, such as Figure ‎3‑9, rather than even spreads. As
Figure ‎3‑9 shows, clustered datapoints still present a similar result
to the even distribution in Figure ‎3‑8. Furthermore, a clustered set of
data could retrain less frequently, ideally between layers. It should
therefore be just as effective to layer sensors, but by requiring fewer
adjustments to the model and therefore it will decrease processing time.

[A close up of a mans face Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎3‑9 Layered sensor data points

In this configuration, each sensor could pass the azimuth and elevation
to the next, including a basket of error to account for variations. This
would ensure the next sensor is effectively aligned, minimising search
time. The linear regression algorithm could then provide the time window
that the sensor could detect the projectile, minimising power and
signature. For the final sensor, the algorithm could then define a
‘trip-wire’ distance, which would initiate the effector at the correct
time to defeat the projectile. Therefore, by layering the sensors
underneath a higher algorithm, the processor is able to reduce the
intercept margin of error throughout the projectiles flight.

Summary 

The aim of this section was to establish the parameters within which an
effector would be required to function, to intercept the projectile. It
is tempting to suggest that all the sensors analysed within this
section, should be utilised within the model, thus providing the most
accurate interception point. However, the impact that would have on both
power and processing would likely see a degradation in performance. But
in order to balance power, signature and accuracy that the system
requires three sensor types: a long-range passive scan, a medium range
track and a short range detect. This paper accepts that in order to
retain its security classification, it may not have the most accurate
and current figures for specific sensors. However, it also assumes that
these figures would only increase the viability of the model, rather
than decrease it. In addition, should any future work see it fit to
increase the security classification, the model used in this development
could easily be run with other data sets. In conclusion, there are
effectively two models to take forward to the next section: an active
model (Figure ‎3‑10) which is capable of generating significantly more
time for the effector and maintains a permanent track of the projectile,
or a passive model (Figure ‎3‑11) with limited signature and minimal
power requirements.

[]

Figure ‎3‑10 Active sensors model: image processing, RADAR and LiDAR.

[A close up of a piece of paper Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎3‑11 Passive sensor model: Image Processing, passive RADAR and
passive IR.

ENGAGE THE THREAT

Probability of hit

Section 3 has established that it is technically feasible to detect an
LRP and predict an intercept point. This section will initially seek to
define the probability that an effector launched at that intercept
point, would in fact hit the projectile (P_(Hit)). The derivation of
P_(Hit) has two distinct components: the probability that the predicted
intercept point will match the projectiles path in time and space
(P_(PIP)); then if true the probability that the effector will hit the
predicted intercept point (P_(Eff)). This probability can be drawn into
a probability tree as below:

This probability tree details the dependant nature of the variables. For
example, the effector could not hit the projectile if the intercept
point was not calculated correctly. This factor rules out a more robust
calculation of probability such as a Bayesian calculation (Gupta, 2017).

Assumptions

In order to bound this section there are a number of assumptions which
must be established, thus defining the scope for this probability, which
is inevitably unable to be correct for all possible situations. These
assumptions are:

-   Factors related to weather will not impact the probability, due to
    the high speed nature of the interaction.

-   The engagement occurs at approximately sea-level, discounting the
    impact of significant changes in pressure.

-   Armoured platforms are able to accurately predict the flight path of
    an LRP, however, the exact calculations are held above the
    classification of this paper. This therefore means that it is
    reasonable to assume the projectile flight path will be linear in
    nature.

-   The projectile was launched without abnormal external ballistic
    disturbance and is therefore not suffering the effects of a
    phenomenon such as aerodynamic jump, discussed in Section ‎2.1.1. As
    is assumed that by this point in the projectiles flight, the
    phenomenon would not be impacting upon trajectory.

Define P_(PIP)

The aim of this section is to develop a probability that the predicted
intercept point accurately represents the location in time and space of
the actual projectile. Therefore the outcome of this section will be a
P_(PIP) with an associated confidence value of its accuracy.
Establishing the parameters which could affect this calculation is a
challenge within itself, however it will be assessed by looking at the
accuracy of the sensed data, as per the active and passive models, then
establishing the accuracy of the prediction algorithm itself. Figure
‎4‑2 surmises the problem of P_(PIP), it displays the projectile in
relation to its vertical and horizontal location (x, y respectively), it
also displays the third dimension, time (z). The intercept point has to
accurately predict all three dimensions. P_(Error) represents the
potential variance in the projectiles flightpath and the interception
point. The possible error for x, y axis, must be ±12mm and the z axis,
±180μs.

[A picture containing game Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎4‑2 Intercept probability diagram

This diagram is very helpful at defining the dependant variables which
contribute to the size of P_(Error). Which is the result of sensed data
accuracy, volume of data and the time between the sensor data and
intercept. The P_(PIP) is actually formed of two independent components,
P_(PIP(x, y)) and P_(PIP(z)). Which details the variance within the
azimuth and elevation, then the variance in time. When combined this
then presents the overall probability,

X, Y Intercept Point

In line with the scope, the factors which effect the projectile, will be
narrowed somewhat, removing external factors such as weather effects. It
must also be noted, for simplicity, the trajectory of the projectile
will be linear. However, if trialled and it appeared that the trajectory
was in-fact a low order polynomial curve, the P_(PIP(x, y)) would still
be relevant. To enable this, the algorithm would need to change the
regression type from linear to polynomial, which requires a minimum
amount of code (Eremenko and de Ponteves, 2020b). This paper will look
at two factors to define the possible error: the accuracy in the
location generated by the sensors and accuracy of the algorithm to
predict the time. This will generate the probability that the predicted
x, y coordinates will contain the projectile. The output of this section
will therefore be the ideal sensor accuracy and the number of data
points to required to generate the highest feasible P_(PIP(x, y)).

Sensor accuracy

The first area to consider is the accuracy of the sensor, to generate
the specific location of the projectile in the x, y axes. The
granularity of a particular sensor will inherently decrease with range,
for example, in a visual sensor the number of pixels, in which the
object resides will decrease, using the Johnson criteria this could
degrade it from identify to detect (Lumang, 2020). As such, it can be
assumed that the closer sensors will generate the most accurate results
and will therefore be used to determine the accuracy. The relationship
between sensor range and the algorithm processing time are closely
linked. The sensor range must be able to generate sufficient data points
to achieve an accurate prediction on the linear algorithm, whilst also
having sufficient time to process the prediction. The most significant
contributor to error will be the detection wavelength itself; a radar
with a 15mm wavelength could present a variance of up to 30mm for the
x, y axes. As a wavelength greater than the diameter of the projectile
would not be capable of detecting it, the model will assume the total
combined range of sensor variance to be between 1mm and 25mm.

Algorithm accuracy

The accuracy of the linear regression algorithm is entirely dependent
upon the data. Most notably, the quantity of the data. The greater the
quantity of data available the less susceptible the model will be to
variations and therefore the more likely it is to be accurate. This does
unfortunately require greater time. The minimum amount of data points
for any accuracy will be three. The model will then seek to identify the
least amount of data points required to generate an accurate model.
Initially this will consist of a trial set between 3 and 15 data points.

Variance model

Ultimately, the combination of the two variables is what generates the
accuracy, an experiment was therefore created to understand which
variables presented the best outcome. A linear regression Machine
Learning (ML) algorithm was created which would predict the distance
from the sensing platform based upon the data points available. Twenty
trial combinations were tested, accounting for every combination of
sensor accuracy and data points. The algorithm generates random
datapoints within the possible range from the baseline to double the
stated sensor accuracy, accounting for the positive and negative error
margin. The randomness represents the inaccuracy and therefore the
variability, as it is unlikely that the inaccuracy will be predictable.
When run, the algorithm produces the predicted position at 10m from the
target, simulating the desired impact point. The earliest data point is
150m from the target, whilst this may seem large, it enables just over
100ms for processing and effector launch. Each combination was tested 10
times and the standard deviation was taken.

This experiment will only assess the x axis (azimuth), but due to
spherical nature of the projectile, it is assumed that this is
representative. The model at Figure ‎4‑3 demonstrates how the baseline
distance (10m) was defined, for simplicity it is assumed that the firing
platform is firing at a 0° to the target platform, therefore the
baseline remains consistent. This also enables a simple reference for
accuracy to be used and compared.

[A picture containing saw Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎4‑3 X_Data development

The summary of the experiment, including the outputs and input data at
Figure ‎4‑4. The probability of the P_(PIP(x, y)) is calculated by
taking the standard deviation of each combination, representing the
basket of variability, it will then be divided by projectile size. The
formula at Equation ‎4‑2 details the process of calculating the
probability, where D is equal to the projectile diameter and σ
represents the standard deviation of the combination samples:

  P_(PIP(x, y)) = D − (D + σ) Equation ‑ X, Y Intercept equation

D = Diameter of projectile

σ = Standard deviation of sample size

X,Y Intercept Point Model Results

  Exp No.   Sensory accuracy (mm)   Volume of Data points   Exp 1   Exp 2   Exp 3   Exp 4   Exp 5   Exp 6   Exp 7   Exp 8   Exp 9   Exp 10   Coefficient   PPIP
  --------- ----------------------- ----------------------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- -------- ------------- ----------
  1         10                      3                       9948    9998    9961    10042   10049   10029   9975    10020   9986    10002    34.07508      0.42319
  2         10                      5                       10012   10021   9991    10013   9993    10010   9995    9992    10007   10008    10.5914       0.702417
  3         10                      7                       10015   10002   9999    10013   10013   9995    10005   10007   10003   10016    7.223419      0.775833
  4         10                      10                      10019   10006   10006   10013   9995    10007   9996    10014   10002   10004    7.627436      0.766226
  5         10                      15                      10010   10012   10014   10010   10014   10018   10006   10006   10009   10010    3.725289      0.870313
  6         15                      3                       9972    10041   9953    10049   10005   9968    9978    10016   10054   10011    36.02484      0.409669
  7         15                      5                       10022   10030   10005   10037   10008   10002   9997    10028   10017   10034    14.31394      0.635907
  8         15                      7                       10006   10018   10046   9998    10024   9978    10011   10033   10019   9999     19.34942      0.563705
  9         15                      10                      10003   10018   10016   10015   9992    10003   10003   10013   10034   10018    11.65476      0.68204
  10        15                      15                      10011   10015   10019   10009   10002   10006   10023   10014   10005   10024    7.568942      0.767602
  11        25                      3                       10064   10000   9900    10021   9977    9939    9999    10019   10014   9967     46.46863      0.349804
  12        25                      5                       10018   9998    10061   10020   10038   9995    9981    10105   10021   9992     37.36442      0.40087
  13        25                      7                       10010   10027   9985    10029   10038   10026   10019   9989    10001   10061    23.08559      0.519906
  14        25                      10                      10009   10016   10006   10008   10047   10022   9969    10034   10051   10027    23.58177      0.514596
  15        25                      15                      10034   10027   10014   10006   10005   10009   10020   10024   10028   10024    10.06037      0.713056
  16        20                      15                      10018   10019   10016   10015   10031   10018   10010   10018   10030   10012    6.848357      0.78497
  17        18                      15                      10014   10015   10022   10024   10031   10022   10024   10022   10011   10011    6.552353      0.792334
  18        17                      15                      10010   10017   10023   10007   10022   10019   10021   10026   10006   10012    7.087548      0.779118
  19        25                      25                      10002   10016   10027   10028   10027   10017   10010   10012   10030   10020    9.206881      0.730847

Figure ‎4‑4 X,Y Intercept Model Data

Model Analysis

The experiment showed that both factors played an important impact on
the probability of a hit. Figure ‎4‑5 shows which variables generated a
>0.7 P_(PIP(x, y)). It is important to note, if the threshold is raised
to >0.8, only the 10mm (accuracy) and 15 (data points) would have been
successful.

[]

Figure ‎4‑5 Success Threshold. The black dashed line shows a >0.7
P_(PIP(x, y)) the green dashed line shows a >0.8.

[]

Figure ‎4‑6 Data distribution. each of the violin plots represent the
spread of predicted intercept points for each combination of sensor
accuracy (x-axis) and variance (denoted by colour, see legend), the two
red lines represent the projectile diameter.

Figure ‎4‑6 demonstrates how the data was distributed throughout the
experiments, the two horizontal red lines represent the projectile
diameter. It shows that the most consistent sensor is 10mm, whilst the
15mm demonstrates a similar max/min, the internal distribution still
leaves a large margin for error. The data also shows that as the sensor
accuracy increases, as does the probability. A 10mm sensory accuracy
demonstrates the most effective sensor accuracy within this trial. This
is therefore assessed to be the minimum sensor accuracy, required to
achieve a hit. If this is not possible, a 25mm sensor accuracy could be
used, but requires a significant increase in data points to enable it.
This in turn, either requires a higher frequency of collect, or more
time, both of which would increase the cost of development. It must also
be noted that 25mm accuracy, with 15 and 25 data points, does not make a
significant gain, it can therefore be assessed that the large gains in
model accuracy are made up to 15 datapoints. This is further
demonstrated in Figure ‎4‑7, which uses polynomial regression to
demonstrate the trend of probability against the data points. It shows
that above 15 data points there are sharply diminishing returns,
therefore investment should be in increasing sensor accuracy, rather
than increasing data points.

[]

Figure ‎4‑7 25mm Probability using polynomial regression

The result of this experiment sees that:

P_(PIP(x,y)) = 0.87 (10mm|15)

Z Intercept Point

The second component of P_(PIP) is P_(PIP(z)) which represents the
probability that at a stated time the projectile will be located at the
given x, y coordinates. Arguably this requires greater accuracy than
P_(PIP(x, y)) as it takes only 360μs for the projectile to travel the
length of itself, using the baseline data. As such, this will be the
time window of an effective engagement, this is extremely small. It can
be assumed that the data collection of the z axis will directly link to
the x, y axis, as such, the number of data points are the same for both
each. The sensor collecting data will be the same for both metrics but
it the time (z axis) will be captured as meta-data of the x, y
coordinates. In line with the results in ‎4.1.2.2.4, 15 data points will
be also assumed for the z axis. This leaves two variables which will
subsequently influence the probability. First, as with the x, y axis, is
the accuracy of the sensor (S_(Acc)), measured this time in μs. The
second is the combined time for processing and launch of the effector
(T_(PE)). The sensor accuracy in this dimension relates to the accuracy
of the time of data capture. The greater the accuracy, the greater the
location will reflect reality. Insufficient accuracy or fidelity of time
will prevent the algorithm from predicting within the required time
window. The combined time required for the processing and launch of an
effector is just as likely to affect the probability. It dictates the
minimum distance at which the sensor could collect a data point. As with
the previous calculations, if this is too long the algorithm will be
inaccurate. The algorithm is again using linear regression, therefore,
if the real time and predicted time diverge, they will not converge and
therefore the likelihood of a miss will increase. For example, if the
inaccuracy in the sensor data has generated a 20μs error in its
prediction 10ms after the last sensed data, this would have increased
significantly with a further 100ms. Therefore, a minor initial error can
cause a miss. This element will also feed into determining the
subsequent effector characteristics.

Model

To derive the minimum value for S_(Acc) and T_(PE), a similar model to
P_(PIP(x,y)) will be used, however, the number of data points will be 15
throughout and the additional variable will be T_(PE). A baseline will
be established using a 1μs S_(Acc) and a 1ms T_(PE). A sequence of
combinations of sensor accuracy and time from sensed data. Each
combination will be run 10 times to ensure that an average error can be
formed. To generate the error, the appropriate baseline value
(calculated from a 0.001 sensory accuracy) will be subtracted from the
average outcome, this will generate the margin of error in time. If the
360μs length of the projectile is then divided by the error, it will
generate a probability that the predicted point contains the projectile.
The experiment bracketed the variables to understand the possible
limits. The combinations and input data are available at Figure ‎4‑8.

Results

[TABLE]

Figure ‎4‑8 Z Intercept model data, Nan values represent values that
could not be calculated as they are the outputs of the baseline values,
a green PPIP represents a probability >0.7, red represents a value <0.7.

It was found that both S_(Acc) and T_(PE) had a significant impact on
the P_(PIP(z)), as such, the model identified that each variable to be
combined to achieve a probability of a hit. Figure ‎4‑9 shows that
0.5ms, despite being larger than the 0.36ms the projectile requires to
move the length of itself, can generate a P_(PIP(z)) of 1.0 at ranges up
to a sensor range of 300ms. When the sensor accuracy is reduced any
further it also reduces the hit probability. It therefore seems that the
driving force for the intercept probability is the sensor accuracy, as
such this should be the focus of development. To achieve the best
probability, it is assessed that any sensors must have an accuracy of
>0.5ms and the detection range should be >300ms.

[A close up of a map Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎4‑9 Z-Axis Intercept model representation, displaying the
prediction curves for each of the last sensed data times, the dashed
line represents a PPip of 0.7.

As a result of the experiment it can therefore be assumed that the
following equation is true for the z-axis.

P_(PIP(z)) = P(S_(ACC)|T_(PE))

P_(PIP(z)) = 1.0 (0.5ms|300ms)

 P_(PIP)

With the definition of the two components of P_(PIP) it is possible to
define what the overall probability will be. As the z axis is a 100%
probability of intercept, when it is combined with the x, y axis, this
is the only variable to the probability. If the parameters for the x,y
and z axis are as prescribed in ‎4.1.2.2.4 and ‎4.1.2.3.1.1, then there
is an 89% probability that the projectile will be in the predicted
location. This can therefore be written as:

P_(PIP )(0.89)= (10mm|15) + (0.5ms|300ms)

  Equation 4- PPip variables

When combined, it is assessed that the combination of these factors is
feasible. The number of data points required is likely to require a
longer-range sensor system, than was initially identified for the
‘tripwire’ close range system alone. It must be capable of reaching this
range whilst remaining within the accuracy parameters stated, of which
x,y may be the most challenging. This further supports the approach of
layering sensors, identified in Section ‎3.1.4. In addition, however,
this can to some degree be mitigated by further reducing the last sensed
data point, which will in-turn reduce the overall error.

Establish P_(Eff)

Now that the probability of the projectile being in the predicted
location, has been established, the second component of P_(Hit) is how
likely an effector is to reach the predicted location. Ultimately
defining the error is very challenging as it is highly dependent on the
type of effector used. To some degree, however, this presents an
opportunity, the size and shape of the effector could be honed to
guarantee the hit. As a result, this section will seek to define the
parameters which would provide a >0.9 P_(Eff). This section will not
seek to define the effector which should be used, but, as with sensors,
seek to define the effector requirements to enable a hit, from which an
effector could be derived. Figure ‎4‑10 shows how the P_(Eff) is
formulated. Ultimately it is related to the dispersion of the effectors
engagement, in its first approximation this is related directly to the
effector engagement time, distance, size and a coefficient which
describes the rate of dispersion. The engagement time itself is a result
of the effector speed/distance, but also the time required for the
system to achieve coincidence between the effector and the PIP.

[A picture containing umbrella Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎4‑10 Effector probability diagram, the blue shaded area
represents the potential spread of the effector. The ambition is to
reduce the cone so that it equates to a probability of >0.9.

Effector hit definition

The first challenge of this variable is to clarify what constitutes an
effector hit on the projectile. This paper acknowledges that the
position on the projectile of the hit will have a significant impact on
the rate of yaw and the trajectory, once hit. This will be analysed in
Section 5 and for this section it will be assumed that a hit anywhere
laterally, will enable the defeat of the projectile. However, the impact
of a glancing hit will be an important factor to understand, it is
possible that a ricochet of this type will transfer the 3300J of energy
required to generate the sufficient angle of yaw. It is stated that the
critical angle of obliquity is related to the impact velocity (Johnson,
Sengupta and Ghosh, 1982). This is further demonstrated in the graph at
Figure ‎4‑11, though this replicates an LRP strike against a flat plate
and not, arguably the reverse. It does however provide an insight into
the interaction of two similarly dense projectiles, at high velocity. It
also suggests that in order to maximise the likelihood of an effective
strike, the effector should seek to interact as close to perpendicular
as possible.

[A close up of a map Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎4‑11 Critical Ricochet angle of a LRP (Daneshjou and Shahravi,
2008)

The relationship of speed to critical ricochet angle also suggests that
a higher speed effector will increase the likelihood of a successful
hit. The relationship of velocity to kinetic energy, as seen in Equation
4-4, also means that a high velocity will significantly increase the
kinetic energy within the effector.

$$KE = \ \frac{1}{2}mv^{2}$$

KE = Kinetic Energy

m = Mass

v = Velocity

  Equation 4- Kinetic Energy

Figure ‎4‑12 shows the relationship of velocity and kinetic energy (KE)
for a 10g and 100g projectile, for reference a Remington .45ACP bullet
typically weighs 15g (Ammunitionstore, 2004). The 100g model suggests
that at 2400m/s, which is the top end velocity of a 125g EFP slug
(Mulligan, 2011), would have 287760J of KE and the 10g, 28776J.

[A screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically generated][A
screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎4‑12 Kinetic Energy of a 10g and 100g projectile, the red line
represents 3300J of KE.

Whilst it is accepted that not all energy would be transferred from the
effector to the projectile, if such a high speed is used, it would only
require 1.14% of the 100g effector’s KE to be transferred upon impact.
Using Equation 4-5 (Hazell et al., 2009) which calculates the energy
transfer, the total reduction in velocity of the effector to still
transfer 3300J of energy can be calculated.

$E_{t} = \frac{1}{2}m_{p}(v_{i}^{2} - v_{r}^{2}$)

$\mathbf{3300 =}\frac{\mathbf{1}}{\mathbf{2}}\mathbf{0.1(}\mathbf{2400}^{\mathbf{2}}\mathbf{-}\mathbf{2386}^{\mathbf{2}}$)
Equation 4- Energy transfer upon impact equation

E_(t) = Energy transferred

m_(p) = Projectile mass

v_(i ) = Initial velocity

v_(r ) = Residual velocity

In effect, this equation means that an effector, even as small as 100g,
with a 2400m/s speed, could generate sufficient yaw to cause the
projectile to miss even with a marginal hit on the projectile. A
reduction on the effector of only 14m/s, would suggest that even an
interaction between the projectile and effector of 1mm, would still be
sufficient. This could suggest that an area effector, such as a
fragmentation grenade used by Arena (Jane’s Defence, 2019j), would
achieve a greater likelihood of success, but this comes with
significantly greater collateral implications, which negate its utility.
Whilst this is an assumption and its validation sits, outside of the
scope of this paper, it does feed into potential future work. But it
does demonstrate effectively that if the effector interacts with the
projectile it will generate the desired yaw and therefore a hit can be
classified as the interaction anywhere on the projectile.

Engagement time

The engagement time is closely linked to the effector speed and
therefore the distance at which the effector can engage. They are
closely linked, but not directly, as the overall engagement time
includes the processing and mechanical actuation of the effector to the
desired location, as well as the effector launch itself. These three
times would be unable to commence until the final sensed data has been
read, therefore making them dependant on the 300ms, 210ms and 180ms
times, established in section ‎4.1.2. From there each of the actions are
sequential and dependant, the actuators can’t achieve coincidence with
the PIP until it has been processed and the effector cannot fire without
coincidence.

Processing

The processing time required to achieve this depends entirely upon the
processing power within the onboard Computer Processing Unit (CPU). This
is therefore a relatively scalable variable, as such this can be shifted
left or right to enable the time for the other two components. However,
a rough estimation can be made using the “big-O notation”, given this is
a linear algorithm, it is notated as a O(n) algorithm. Using this
notation, supported by the %timeit feature of Jupyter notebooks the
following was time was taken from the linear regression ML function used
to define P_(PIP(x, y)), using 15 datapoints:

637 µs ± 128 µs per loop

(mean ± std. dev. of 7 runs, 1 loop each)

Whilst this is only one algorithm, its simplicity reflects any algorithm
that would be used to predict the P_(PIP), it can therefore reasonably
be assumed that the processing time will be <1ms.

Achieving Coincidence

A key component of time will be the ability to rotate the effector to
the position required for it to engage the threat. Current systems exist
which are capable of achieving this such as the General Dynamics high
speed two-axis gimbal which is claimed to be capable of “a 90-degree
azimuth, 45-degree elevation combined move can be performed in less than
20 milliseconds, including settle” (General Dynamics Mission Systems,
2020). This is exceptionally fast, though as a manufacturer’s statement
it is liable to optimism bias and the additional weight of heavier
effectors may reduce this time to some extent. It is also, however,
unlikely that the effector would need to rotate through a 90-degree arc,
infact adjustments, if assumed to be roughly adjacent to the platform,
will be minor by nature. It could also be inferred that because this
system was developed in 2020, that this is an area of future investment
and the capability is likely only to increase. Furthermore, by using an
unmanned platform, there is potentially greater space and weight
available, therefore more launchers could be integrated thus minimising
the rotational requirement. As a result, the 20ms time factor for
movement can be assumed to be appropriate for this system. This short
reflex time means it is inapplicable to the model, as even within the
passive model, the gimbal could adjust 18 times within the track phase.
This is significantly greater in the active model. The 20ms can then be
removed from the total effector engagement time, to provide the time for
the effector to reach the target. If 180, 210 and 300ms are taken as the
overall engagement time, this leaves 159, 189 and 279ms for the effector
to reach the projectile.

Effector launch

The factors which effect the launch time required are, the distance from
the target and the speed at which the effector travels. The graph at
Figure ‎4‑13 shows the possible engagement distances available at four
different speeds, and across the three time windows. It demonstrates
that even using the most constraining time window, a projectile
traveling at 2400m/s could engage a projectile up to 380m away, which is
significant and significantly above the outline requirement.

[A picture containing text Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎4‑13 Effector engagement distances, each black line represents
the three potential engagement times

Effector accuracy

The accuracy of the effector could be impacted by a series of factors.
These factors could mean that whilst the intercept point is correct, the
effector may not be able to hit it. These are likely to increase as the
engagement distance increases. One factor is the effects of external
ballistics, which are defined as: gravity, wind and drag (Khan, 2017).
Whilst these effects are traditionally seen in slower projectiles, the
margins of error required for this engagement, may see them having to be
modelled for some effectors. If the effect is significant, external
ballistics may present a cap on the distance from which the projectile
can be engaged. As this is largely the result of time, rather than
distance, the best method of minimising this effect may be generating
the greatest speed. This is supported by the graph at Figure ‎4‑14 which
uses an online shooting trajectory calculator to demonstrate the
difference in projectile trajectory between 860m/s (2820fps) and
304.8m/s (1000fps) in the same atmospheric conditions. Whilst this is a
model based around a bullet, it still serves to demonstrate the effect
of increasing velocity on external ballistics. As such, the greatest
possible speed should be employed to thus minimise the effect of
external ballistics.

[[Chart Label] Ballistic Trajectory Chart]

Figure ‎4‑14 Trajectory comparison (ShootersCalculator, 2020)

The other area which could affect the accuracy of the effector are
variances in manufacture, which may still sit within a tolerance, but
would regardless have an impact. Unlike external ballistics, this is
largely independent of the distance not the time. For example, a 1%
manufacture tolerance would cause the effector to miss the projectile in
2.5m. The distance required and the manufacture tolerance must therefore
be balanced. Figure ‎4‑15 is a table from ISO 286 showing the industry
standard tolerance grades.

[A close up of text on a white background Description automatically
generated]

Figure ‎4‑15 ISO 286 manufacture tolerances (International Organisation
for Standardisation, 2010)

To find the minimum required tolerance, each of the tolerances was found
as a percentage of the overall effector diameter. It was then multiplied
by distances from 0-300m, this tolerance then generated an assessed
potential variance over than range. Figure ‎4‑16 shows graphically how
these variances could develop over the range. It looks at both a 10mm
and a 25mm effector and the red line details where the variance is
greater than 25mm, which would therefore make the probability of a hit
>1. By taking the previously established speed of 2400ms and a time of
159ms, the projectile is capable of a max engagement of 381m. IT10, with
a 25mm projectile, appears to be the most effective combination. Whilst,
it does not enable the effector to reach its full range, it still
enables a 298m engagement.

[][]

Figure ‎4‑16 Dispersion rates across ISO 286 IT levels, 100% of eff
diameter = 25mm

This model is reliant upon the assumption that the variance would
increase both directly and proportionally to the increase of range. This
assumption means that the output of this model cannot be taken
specifically. It does however demonstrate that even within current
manufacturing tolerances there is likely to be sufficient accuracy to
reduce the effector variance below the point at would it would increase
the likelihood of missing the target.

System requirements

The total probability of a hit can be derived from the probability tree
at Figure ‎4‑1, by inserting the correct probability values, this is
shown diagrammatically at Figure ‎4‑17:

Figure ‎4‑17 Summary probability tree

As the only variable which is less than 1 is P_(PIP(x, y)) it actually
forms a simple calculation of ((0.87 x 1) x 1) = 0.87. Therefore, this
is the overall probability of a hit If the effector achieves all the
requirements stated in Table ‎4‑1.

The modelling within this section has therefore demonstrated that the
effector could engage the projectile with a 0.89 probability of a hit,
if the effector achieves the requirements stated in Table ‎4‑1 Effector
requirements. These should therefore be the baseline set of manufacture
requirements to enable the system to operate.

Table ‎4‑1 Effector requirements

  Serial   Requirement                                       Parameters
  -------- ------------------------------------------------- --------------
  1.       Sensor accuracy (x,y)                             10mm
  2.       Sensor data points                                15
  3.       Sensor accuracy (z)                               0.5ms
  4.       Maximum last sensed data                          300ms (500m)
  5.       Manufacture tolerance                             <IT10
  6.       Engagement range                                  298m
  7.       Effector speed                                    2400m/s
  8.       Processing time                                   <1ms
  9.       90-degree azimuth, 45-degree elevation rotation   <20ms
  10.      Effector diameter                                 25mm

Additional engagement characteristics

Section 4 enabled this paper to prove that engaging the projectile is
feasible, which was the primary objective of this research. There is
however some additional areas that should be explored to ensure the
project provides appropriately comprehensive research. As a result, this
section will seek to explore where the effector should engage the
effector and how the models, put forward in this paper, compare with
real-world ammunition threats, rather than solely the baseline.

Where to hit

The probability of a hit model uses the assumption that the effector
could strike the projectile at any point on the effector and achieve the
same effect. Whilst Section ‎4.1.3.1 effectively demonstrated that the
interaction could be at any point in the diameter of the projectile, it
has not been yet demonstrated how an interaction at different sections
across the length of the projectile affect its yaw rate. The study by
David Rocco, which is a key foundation study for this paper, was able to
generate the proportionally sufficient projectile yaw by striking the
centre of the projectile (Rocco, 2018). This study required 3300J to
generate 7m of yaw, this can therefore be taken as the baseline figure.
Using the algorithm from Figure ‎2‑12 and the max intercept range of
300m, identified in the system requirements, the projectile could yaw up
to 1806m from its target if struck centrally. During the P_(PIP(z))
experiment, it was seen that 0.3ms sensor accuracy generated a 2.86
probability of hit, which suggests it could enable the projectile to be
divided into three sections, with the most optimal being targeted. This
section will therefore assess the implications of striking the
projectile in the fore and aft of the projectile, in comparison to the
centre, each of which is defined at Figure ‎5‑1.

[A picture containing game, player, sign, man Description automatically
generated]

Figure ‎5‑1 Projectile section definition

The point at the centre of the projectile will be representative of the
centre of mass. As a result a strike at either the fore or aft points
will generate angular momentum around the centre, which will act as the
axis for the rotation (Khan Academy, 2020). If the kinetic energy
striking that point is greater than the forward kinetic energy, then it
can be assumed that this will cause the projectile to continually rotate
around the lateral axis. Whilst this may still achieve the intention of
missing the target, it would make the projectiles path unpredictable and
erratic.

  Name     Mass(kg)   Velocity(m/s)   KE(MJ)   References
  -------- ---------- --------------- -------- -------------------------
  M829A1   4.6        1560            5.597    (Jane’s Defence, 2019e)
  3BM42    4.85       1700            7.008    (Jane’s Defence, 2019b)
  120-1    4.03       1730            6.031    (Jane’s Defence, 2019g)

Table ‎5‑1 Projectile kinetic energy

If this KE data for each projectile is compared to the data in Table
‎5‑1, the lateral and forward KE’s can be compared. Using the 100g
effector only 287760J of lateral KE is generated at 2400m/s. Which is
only 5% of the forward motion, as such it is therefore unlikely to
generate this type of lateral axis rotation in the projectile.

[A drawing of a face Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎5‑2 Initial impact and effect of drag from a plan view.

This does however only account for the initial strike of the effector,
but as this strike will generate a moment, causing the front of the
projectile to rotate around the centre of mass. Even a minor rotation
will generate a significant level of drag, which is likely to exacerbate
the moment and cause the projectile to spin, as shown in Figure ‎5‑2. A
strike to the fore of the projectile is likely to increase the angle of
yaw as it causes to spin away from the axis of travel. This is however
the opposite for a strike to the aft, which would cause a spin towards
the axis of travel and which could cause the projectile to yaw in the
wrong direction, towards the protecting platform. The separate
trajectory modelling for each strike location is out of the scope of
this paper, but it does present an opportunity for future research. But
regardless, some helpful implications can be made if the former
assumptions are adopted. Firstly, the potential for a reduction in rate
of yaw that a strike to the aft could generate makes it an undesirable
location. This leaves the fore and the centre, of these both would meet
the minimum yaw rate, but the centre is a more preferable location to
strike. Firstly, the avoidance of spin will generate a more predictable
yaw, this is important for collateral damage considerations. Secondly,
by striking the middle of the projectile the effector has the greatest
possibility of a hit on the lateral plane. If it over leads it could hit
the fore, however, if you over lead the fore strike it will miss.
Therefore, as the required level of yaw can be achieved by striking the
centre of the projectile, it is suggested that striking the centre of
the projectile will be the most effective targeting method.

Real world case studies. 

So far in this section, the probabilities have been developed using a
fictional projectile generated as a product of the mean values from a
range of Long Rod Penetrators. As discussed in section ‎2.1.3, whilst
this was consciously done to generate a reasonable baseline, it does
mean that in some areas the projectiles may not generate the same
P_(HIT). Most notably this is related to those physical projectiles with
the smallest length and the smallest diameter. Table ‎5‑2 shows the
projectile with the shortest length, the US M89A3 and the Chinese 125-1,
which has the smallest diameter. Of note, these are two different
projectiles, which supports this papers’ premise the using a baseline
formed from the characteristics mean was the most appropriate solution.
The M829A3 will be run through the P_(PIP(x, y)) model and the 125-1
though the P_(PIP(z)). As the two characteristics are found on separate
projectile, a combined probability will not be calculated. Despite this,
the test still generates a useful measure of the applicability of the
platform, proving its viability against real-world threat examples.

Table ‎5‑2 Projectiles with the smallest dimensions

  Name     Length (mm)   Diameter (mm)   Country of Origin   Reference
  -------- ------------- --------------- ------------------- -------------------------
  M829A3   684           22              USA                 (Jane’s Defence, 2019e)
  125-1    554           28              China               (Jane’s Defence, 2019g)

M89A3

The diameter of the M89A3 is 3mm less than the mean of 25mm. This does
increase the challenge in trying to predict the X,Y intercept point, as
it is a proportionally smaller target. When the model is re-run with the
22mm value, it in fact only reduces the probability by 2%, moving from
0.87 to 0.85. It can be assessed that this relatively significant
reduction in size has a very minimal impact on the probability of an
intercept. The second component which is affected by the diameter is the
likelihood of the effector to strike the projectile. When the effector
model was re-run with the new diameter, it had a more significant effect
that the intercept prediction. The range at which the effector could
guarantee a strike, assuming the IT10 standard, has changed from 298m to
262m, a reduction of 12%. Therefore, if this was a likely target set the
platform would either have to accept a reduced engagement range of -12%
or improve the manufacturing tolerances to IT09. As improvements, such
as this, are likely to be more expensive, different grades of effector
could be used to target specific threats.

125-1

The 125-1 is only 554mm in length, which is 53mm shorter than the
baseline projectile, which is a 9% reduction. This reduction will have
an impact on the probability in the Z axis as it will reduce the time
taken for the projectile to travel the length of itself, therefore
reducing the time for the predicted point to coincide with the
projectile. It is unlikely to affect the likelihood of the effector
interaction, as length sits far outside the boundaries of IT10
manufacture tolerances. If the sensor accuracy is 0.3mm then this will
not impact the likelihood of impact as it reduces from 2.86 to 2.62. As
a result, it can still target the centre of the projectile. Even if the
sensor accuracy is reduced from 0.3 to 0.5, it still only reduces the
probability to 1.27. Therefore, even with the significant reduction in
length of the 125-1, the defined variables are accurate enough to still
generate the same probability of a hit.

Summary

The dimensionality of the projectile does impact on the likelihood of
impact, but it is not as significant as might have originally been
anticipated. As shown in Figure ‎5‑3, which shows the probability of a
hit for a percentage from 1% of to 140% of the baseline dimensions, the
greatest increase in probability, in either dimension is between 1% and
20%. Beyond 20% the probability is either above 1, in the case of
length, or for diameter, the gradient slows significantly. It can
therefore be assumed that for any reasonable variation, (+/-40%) in the
dimensions of a LRP, the probability of a hit will still remain above
70%. This means that the system is not dependant upon specific weapon
types and would also provide a level of resilience against future weapon
developments, if it is assumed that a significant leap in technology
would be required to reduce the dimensions above 40% and retain the same
kinetic energy.

[]

  Figure ‎5‑3 Area plot showing the impact on likelihood of hit for
  differing percentages of the baseline dimensions.

CONCLUSION

The previous sections of this thesis have demonstrated that an
autonomous APS platform, if developed in line with the developed
requirements, is technically feasible and theoretically capable of
defeating an LRP, in a manner in which currently available open-source
technology cannot. By way of a conclusion this section will draw
together all the capability requirements and constraints, then apply
them to a theoretical example of use, to understand its practical
feasibility and define potential areas for further work.

Requirements and characteristics

The following table at Table ‎6‑1 draws together all of the development
requirements and the characteristics of the system, in order to allow it
to defeat an LRP. Not all parameters are exclusive, in some areas other
values may produce success, however these were the values that resulted
from the model testing.

Table ‎6‑1 Consolidated table of system requirements and
characteristics.

+--------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Serial | Factor                      | Parameters                  |
+========+=============================+=============================+
| 1.     | Sensor accuracy (x,y)       | 10mm                        |
+--------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 2.     | Sensor data points          | 15                          |
+--------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 3.     | Sensor accuracy (z)         | 0.3ms (desirable)           |
|        |                             |                             |
|        |                             | 0.5ms (minimum)             |
+--------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 4.     | Maximum last sensed data    | 300ms (500m)                |
+--------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 5.     | Manufacture tolerance       | <IT10                       |
+--------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 6.     | Max effector range          | 298m (against a 25mm        |
|        |                             | target)                     |
+--------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 7.     | Effector speed              | 2400m/s                     |
+--------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 8.     | Processing time             | <1ms                        |
+--------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 9.     | 90-degree azimuth,          | <20ms                       |
|        | 45-degree elevation         |                             |
|        | rotation                    |                             |
+--------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 10.    | Effector size               | 25mm                        |
+--------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 11.    | Effector weight             | 100g                        |
+--------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 12.    | Effector engagement time    | <141ms                      |
+--------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 13.    | Projectile distance         | 46.4m                       |
|        | travelled during effector   |                             |
|        | engagement                  |                             |
+--------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 14.    | Maximum total engagement    | 141ms                       |
|        | sequence time (assuming 1   |                             |
|        | data point/ms)              |                             |
+--------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 15.    | Minimum range for           | 338.4m                      |
|        | engagement                  |                             |
+--------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 16.    | Minimum impact range        | 9m                          |
+--------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 17.    | Minimum defendable          | 347.4m                      |
|        | engagement                  |                             |
+--------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 18.    | APS range from projectile   | 220.58                      |
+--------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+

Practical Feasibility

To contextualise these characteristics the system will be hypothetically
employed in support of an armoured platform. This will seek to
understand how the characteristics enhance or constrain the armoured
platforms manoeuvre and define how the APS can defend the platform.
Figure ‎6‑1 demonstrates the minimum range requirement for an engagement
at max effector range, in this situation the APS would be able to defend
the platform from a projectile that was fired from greater than 356m
from the target platform. Another useful consideration shown by this
diagram is that although the effector is capable of striking the
projectile from 298m, this does not necessarily mean that the platform
can be this far from the projectile. If it takes 120ms for the effector
to reach its intercept point, the projectile will have travelled
200.37m. Using trigonometry, this means that the furthest from the
projectile the system can be is 220.58m.

[A close up of a map Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎6‑1 Practical engagement sequence example.

Such a limit of 220.58m places some constraints on the platform’s
mobility. In addition, the figure displays in effect the last safe
moment engagement of 9m, just sufficient to generate the yaw required to
miss the target. If the distance between the projectile and the platform
remains at a constant 220.58m, then the further the intercept point sits
from the target platform, the narrower the cone of protection will be.
Figure ‎6‑2 demonstrates the potential cone of protection for a minimum
distance engagement. By adding the 9m yaw distance and the projectile
travel distance, it can be seen that the system is able to cover a 46°
arc. If this is increased to a 99m yaw distance reduces the arc to 36°.
The employment of the system will therefore require a level of balance
to be struck between generating sufficient buffer to ensure the
projectile will yaw sufficiently to miss the target and providing the
optimal protection to the platform.

[A screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically generated]

[A close up of a device Description automatically generated]

Figure ‎6‑2 Cone of protection calculation at minimum intercept range
(9m) and a larger range (20m)

The Whittaker model suggests that most vehicles will be struck on the
frontal arc and therefore armour should be focussed, but not solely, on
the front 60° of the platform (Rahman et al., 2017). This sees the 99m
yaw distance, demonstrated in Figure ‎6‑2, as almost half of the
Whittaker model suggestion. This may seem like a significant drawback
from the outset, but as anti-armour technology develops and
proliferates, there has been a feeling from scholars that the Whittaker
model, which was developed in 1948, is outdated and armour should now
have a 360° focus (Hazell, 2016; Manning and Simner, 2009). With this in
mind, this plays to the strength of an autonomous systems flexibility.
It has the ability to predict where firing vehicles may be, based on
threat, human direction and external data sources, then adapt its
posture and location. As such, assuming this component is sufficiently
accurate, the system will be able to deliver a complete coverage to the
platform. Furthermore, this could be mitigated to a greater extent by
increasing the number of platforms conducting the protect task. Whilst
this may not be feasible for single vehicle formations, larger groups of
vehicles could group their platforms to provide the best protection for
the threat.

The engagement limitation is to some degree only a limitation of the
capabilities assessed in this paper. The factor which has the greatest
influence upon the engagement range is the manufacturing tolerances, as
this dictated the likelihood of an intercept. As such, it is suggested
that an area for further work could be the development of an effector
with a higher manufacturing tolerance, whilst remaining sufficiently
rugged for effective employment, which would enable the intercept to
occur at a greater range.

Whilst the minimum engagement range is 347m, if the effector is fired at
its full range, this could be reduced by moving the platform closer to
the projectiles and target platform simultaneously. Though it is noted,
that this would not always be feasible within the situation. This would
enable the tactical commander to reduce the minimum engagement range
effectively. If the distance from the projectile was reduced to 5m and
the effector struck the projectile at 9m from the target, the overall
engagement could be within 64m. This would however significantly limit
the platforms flexibility and agility.

Applicability in a complex environment

The use of yaw as a defeat mechanism does also create a challenge for
employment in complex environments, especially those surrounded by
people or soft skinned vehicles. If the projectile is intercepted at the
99m point, using the model at Figure ‎2‑2, the projectile would yaw 170m
from the centre of platform. In an urban setting, this means the
projectile is likely to impact into a building, with some significant
force. Furthermore, the short range nature of urban engagements means
that many may sit below the systems minimum range bubble. As a result,
its employment in the urban is limited. Of greater concern than the yaw
angle, is the distance that the projectile will continue to travel
beyond the target platform. Despite the interaction with the effector,
it can be assumed that a significant amount of energy resides within the
projectile, meaning it could travel much further than the target
platform. As the armoured platform is likely to be the forward edge of a
formation, followed by lighter armoured Infantry Fighting Vehicles or
Armoured Personnel Carriers (MOD, 2011), this still poses a significant
risk to those platforms. In addition, this travel could also be seen in
the vertical plane, causing risk to low flying platforms such as
helicopters. If the effector was able to interact with the projectile
from an elevated position, it could cause the effector to yaw with a
downward trajectory, forcing it into the ground. This could be the
result of repurposing a mast mounted camera system (FLIR Systems, 2020),
already common place on the battlefield. With this approach, it is
likely to increase the risk of ricochet, as such, it would warrant
further investigation into the trajectory of a yawing projectile and
appropriate methods to negate its effects.

Summary

The use of case studies demonstrated in this section shows that this
theoretical system is not the perfect defence system, but it does
present an opportunity, assuming the requirements can be met, to defeat
an ammunition type which is currently not possible with current APS. It
provides flexible and dynamic protection that can be quickly adapted and
reallocated to the areas of most need. In addition, the freedom of a
bespoke APS platform is its modularity and carriage weight, this would
enable the system to potentially carry different systems to tackle
different threats. Thus, making it a more complete suite of protection.
By removing this threat from a tank, this will enable armour development
to focus on other characteristics than depth, namely space and weight.
Ultimately this system would enable an armoured platform to be faster,
lighter and better protected. Whilst this may appear to be a minor
change, it actually holds implications for armoured warfare as a whole.
Reducing mass and weight enables the platform to be projected further
strategically, which in turn increases the opportunity for its use and
its application on the battlefield. This is a topical and important
factor as some nations begin to have discussions about the relevance and
utility of armour on the battlefield (Owen, 2020). Tactically, it
enables the system to be faster and more agile, allowing it not to be
acquired, rather than not be hit. It also presents the freedom for
platforms to incorporate additional sensors or weapon systems, something
that has been constrained by size and weight. In conclusion this paper
has presented a technically feasible method of developing a more
effective, agile and automated APS, than the current set of APS
available.

AREAS OF FUTURE RESEARCH.

The following areas present possible topics for further investigation as
a result of this research:

1.  A practical study, further developing this theoretical work and
      demonstrating its capability in an experimental setting, testing
      and proving the feasibility of the stated effector requirements.

2.  Modelling of the trajectory of flight of an LRP and understanding
      its consistency over differing ranges.

3.  Understand and define the amount of Kinetic energy transferred
      between two projectiles during a partial interaction.

4.  Trajectory modelling showing the difference in yaw rate if an LRP is
      struck by an effector at the fore, centre or aft.

5.  Methods of controlling the projectiles trajectory, post interaction,
      to limit or mitigate any collateral damage.

6.  Further development of an effector, which has higher manufacturing
      tolerances and therefore the ability to engage a projectile at a
      significantly greater range.

7.  Development of an algorithm capable of monitoring and maintaining a
      specific distance from a stated platform, whilst identifying and
      occupying positions for situational awareness.

8.  To what extent can an autonomous platform, heavily reliant upon
      sensors be protected from Electromagnetic and cyber effects.

9.  Can this system be employed to protect multiple vehicle formations?

REFERENCES

Abd Ghani, K. and Yosri, H. (2011) ‘Application of Artificial
Intelligent For Armour Vehicle Detection Using Digital Image Processing
For Aerial Application’, International Journal on Advanced Science,
Engineering and Information Technology, 1(2), p. 173.De Albuquerque,
M.P., Chacon, G.T., De Faria, E.L. and Murari, A. (2012) ‘High-speed
image processing algorithms for real-time detection of MARFEs on JET’,
IEEE Transactions on Plasma Science, 40(12), pp. 3485–3492.Allison, G.
(2018) A look at the Israeli Iron Fist system., UK Defence
JournalAmmunitionstore (2004) ‘.45 acp’, , pp. 1–8.Amraii, S.A., Walker,
P., Lewis, M., Chakraborty, N. and Sycara, K. (2014) ‘Explicit vs. Tacit
leadership in influencing the behavior of swarms’, Proceedings - IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, IEEE, pp.
2209–2214.Anderson, C.E., Walker, J.D., Bless, S.J. and Partom, Y.
(1996) ‘On the L/D effect for long-rod penetrators’, International
Journal of Impact Engineering, 18(3), pp. 247–264.BAE Systems (2015)
‘Hypervelocity projectile’Bench-Capon, T.J.M. (2020) ‘Ethical approaches
and autonomous systems’, Artificial Intelligence, 281, p.
103239.Borenstein, J., Thomas, D., Sights, B., Ojeda, L., Bankole, P.
and Fellars, D. (2010) ‘Human leader and robot follower team: correcting
leader’s position from follower’s heading’, Unmanned Systems Technology
XII, 7692, p. 76921E.Bradley, C. (Business consultant), Smit, S. and
Hirt, M. (Business consultant) (2018) ‘Strategy beyond the hockey
stick : people, probabilities, and big moves to beat the odds’, Strategy
beyond the hockey stick : people, probabilities, and big moves to beat
the odds / by Chris Bradley, Martin Hirt, Sven Smit, , pp. 75–90.Bundy,
M. (2001) ‘Aerodynamic jump: A short range view for long rod
projectiles’, Shock and Vibration, 8(3–4), pp. 239–251.Capgemini (2019)
Accelerating automotive’s AI transformation: How driving AI
enterprise-wide can turbo-charge organizational value.Cayzac, R.,
Carette, E. and Alziary de Roquefort, T. (2001) ‘Intermediate Ballistics
Unsteady Sabot Separation: First Computations and Validations’, 19th
International Symposium on Ballistics, 1(May), pp. 297–305.Chivers, M.
(2019) Differential GPS Explained., Esri Available at:
https://www.esri.com/news/arcuser/0103/differential1of2.html (Accessed:
22 January 2020).Clemons, E. and Santamaria, J. (2002) Maneuver
Warfare: Can Modern Military Strategy Lead You to Victory?., Harvard
Business Review Available at:
https://hbr.org/2002/04/maneuver-warfare-can-modern-military-strategy-lead-you-to-victory
(Accessed: 18 November 2019).Colone, F., Cardinali, R. and Lombardo, P.
(2006) ‘Cancellation of clutter and multipath in passive radar using a
sequential approach’, IEEE National Radar Conference - Proceedings,
(May), pp. 393–399.Cowper, M. and Pannell, C. (2011) Tank Spotters
Guide.Daneshjou, K. and Shahravi, M. (2008) ‘Penetrator strength effect
in long-rod critical ricochet angle’, Journal of Mechanical Science and
Technology, 22(11), pp. 2076–2089.Davison, N. (2018) ‘Autonomous Weapon
Systems: An Ethical Basis for Human Control?’, Humanitarian Law & Policy
Blog of the ICRC, (April)Eremenko, K. and de Ponteves, H. (2020a)
Machine Learning A to Z Course: Section 4, Simple Linear Regression.,
Udemy Available at: https://www.udemy.com/course/machinelearning/
(Accessed: 27 February 2020).Eremenko, K. and de Ponteves, H. (2020b)
Machine Learning A to Z Course: Section 5, Polynomial Regression.,
UdemyEzuma, M., Ozdemir, O., Anjinappa, C.K., Gulzar, W.A. and Guvenc,
I. (2019) ‘Micro-UAV detection with a low-grazing angle millimeter wave
radar’, IEEE Radio and Wireless Symposium, RWS, IEEE, pp. 1–4.FLIR
Systems (2020) FLIR LVSS Lightweight Vehicle Surveillance System .
Available at: https://www.flir.co.uk/products/lvss/ (Accessed: 24 June
2020).Fortin, J., Bédard, J. and Valcartier, D. (2007) Defensive aids
suite for light armoured vehicles Closure report (12rd) Defence R&D
Canada-Valcartier.Gee, D.J. and Littlefield, D.L. (2001) YAW IMPACT OF
ROD PROJECTILES.General Dynamics Mission Systems (2020) High-Speed
Two-Axis Gimbal. Available at:
https://gdmissionsystems.com/products/imaging/optical-systems/scanning-pointing/high-speed-two-axis-gimbal
(Accessed: 6 March 2020).General Dynamics OTS (2011) ‘Iron Fist Active
Protection System (APS)’Global Security (2019) Kornet (AT-14)., Global
Security Available at:
https://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/russia/at-14.htm
(Accessed: 14 October 2019).Golovachev, Y., Etinger, A., Pinhasi, G.A.
and Pinhasi, Y. (2018) ‘Millimeter wave high resolution radar accuracy
in fog conditions—theory and experimental verification’, Sensors
(Switzerland), 18(7)Gu, Y. and Zhang, W. (2011) ‘QR code recognition
based on image processing’, 2011 International Conference on Information
Science and Technology, ICIST 2011, IEEE, pp. 733–736.Gupta, D. (2017)
Introduction to Conditional Probability and Bayes theorem in R for data
science professionals., Analytics VidhyaHadi, R.A., Sulong, G. and
George, L.E. (2014) ‘VEHICLE DETECTION AND TRACKING TECHNIQUES: A
CONCISE REVIEW’, 5(1), pp. 1–12.Hazell, P. (2016) Armour.Hazell, P.J.,
Cowie, A., Kister, G., Stennett, C. and Cooper, G.A. (2009) ‘Penetration
of a woven CFRP laminate by a high velocity steel sphere impacting at
velocities of up to 1875 m/s’, International Journal of Impact
Engineering, 36(9) Elsevier Ltd, pp. 1136–1142.Heine, A., Wickert, M.
and Thoma, K. (2013) ‘Future vehicle protection-technologies for
ultra-fast close-distance active protection systems’, Proceedings - 27th
International Symposium on Ballistics, BALLISTICS 2013., Vol.2, pp.
1030–1039.Herwig, C.B. and Schalkoff, R.J. (2015) ‘Morphological Image
Processing Using Artificial Neural Networks’, Control and Dynamic
Systems, 67(October 2015)Houliotis, K., Oikonomidis, P., Charchalakis,
P. and Stipidis, E. (2018) ‘Mission-Critical Systems Design Framework’,
Advances in Science, Technology and Engineering Systems Journal, 3(2)
ASTES Journal, pp. 128–137.House Of Lords (2018) ‘AI in the U.K.: ready,
willing, and able.’, 4(1–2), pp. 26–28.Huang, Z.G., Wessam, M.E. and
Chen, Z.H. (2014) ‘Numerical investigation of the three-dimensional
dynamic process of sabot discard’, Journal of Mechanical Science and
Technology, 28(7), pp. 2637–2649.International Organisation for
Standardisation (2010) ‘ISO-286, code system for tolerances on linear
sizes’, ISOJane’s (2019) Challenger 2., IHS Markit Available at:
https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jaa_0075-jafv (Accessed: 18 November
2019).Jane’s Defence (2019a) Javelin Weapon System., IHS Markit
Available at: https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jiw_0808-jiw_
(Accessed: 9 October 2019).Jane’s Defence (2020) Land Warfare Platforms:
Armoured Fighting Vehicles - Challenger 2. Available at:
https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/JAA_0075-JAFV (Accessed: 9 May
2020).Jane’s Defence (2019b) ‘Russian 125mm APFSDS Ammunition’, IHS
MarkitJane’s Defence (2019c) ‘Nexter 120mm Ammunition’, IHS MarkitJane’s
Defence (2019d) ‘Rheinmetal Ammunition’, IHS MarkitJane’s Defence
(2019e) ‘Abrams APFSDS Ammunition’, IHS MarkitJane’s Defence (2019f)
‘L30 Charm Ammunition’, IHS MarkitJane’s Defence (2019g) ‘Norinco APFSDS
125mm’, IHS Markit2Jane’s Defence (2019h) Active Defence System., IHS
MarkitJane’s Defence (2019i) ‘Iron Fist Family of Active Protection’,
IHS MarkitJane’s Defence (2019j) Arena Family of Active Protection
Systems., IHS Markit Available at:
https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jlwu0063-jlwu (Accessed: 19 December
2019).Johnson, W., Sengupta, A.K. and Ghosh, S.K. (1982) ‘High velocity
oblique impact and ricochet mainly of long rod projectiles: An
overview’, International Journal of Mechanical Sciences, 24(7), pp.
425–436.Karthik, A.K. and Blum, R.S. (2018) ‘Improved Detection
Performance for Passive Radars Exploiting Known Communication Signal
Form’, IEEE Signal Processing Letters, 25(11), pp. 1625–1629.Keller, J.
(2018) ‘DRS Land Systems for active protection aboard M1A2 Abrams main
battle tanks’, Military & Aerospace EngineeringKhan Academy (2020) Ball
hits rod angular momentum example (video) . Available at:
https://www.khanacademy.org/science/physics/torque-angular-momentum/torque-tutorial/v/ball-hits-rod-angular-momentum-example
(Accessed: 14 July 2020).Khan, I. (2017) ‘Study of Internal & External
Ballistics for . 177 cal & . 22 cal Projectiles’, (January 2017)Kim, A.
and Golnaraghi, M.F. (2004) ‘Initial calibration of an inertial
measurement unit using an optical position tracking system’, Record -
IEEE PLANS, Position Location and Navigation Symposium, , pp.
96–101.Kim, G. and Park, Y. (2016) ‘LIDAR pulse coding for high
resolution range imaging at improved refresh rate’, Optics Express,
24(21), p. 23810.Liden, E. (2010) ‘Interaction between high-velocity
penertrators and moving armor components’, , pp. 1–66.Lidén, E. and
Helte, A. (2016) ‘The break-up tendency of long rod projectiles’,
Defence Technology, 12(2) China Ordnance Society, pp. 177–187.Liden, E.,
Helte, A. and Andersson, O. (2016) ‘The Break-Up Tendancy of Long Rod
Projectiles’, Iternational Symposium on Ballistics.Limnaios, G.,
Oikonomou, D., Nomikos, P. and Zikidis, K.C. (2019) ‘Passive Radars and
their use in the Modern Battlefield’, Journal of Computations &
Modelling, 9(2), pp. 1792–8850.Lumang, M. (2020) ‘LONG-RANGE
SURVEILLANCE CAMERAS and JOHNSON’S CRITERIA’Manning, C. and Simner, D.
(Supervisor) (2009) ‘Vehicle Weight Trade-Off Study’, (July)Mao, W.,
Zhang, Z., Qiu, L., He, J., Cui, Y. and Yun, A.S. (2017) ‘Indoor follow
me drone’, MobiSys 2017 - Proceedings of the 15th Annual International
Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services. Association
for Computing Machinery, Inc, pp. 345–358.Maundril, B. (2019) AUSA 2019:
Textron and BAE Systems go head to head with Robotic Combat Vehicle
concepts - UV - Unmanned Vehicles - Shephard Media., Shephard Media
Available at:
https://www.shephardmedia.com/news/uv-online/ausa-2019-textron-and-bae-systems-go-head-head-rob/
(Accessed: 23 October 2019).MBDA (2018) 5th Generation ATGM.MBDA Missile
Systems (2018) ‘MMP. 5th generation land combat missile system’, , p.
2.Meyer, T. (1998a) ‘Why Develop Active Protective Systems (APS)?’,
(June), pp. 1–11.Meyer, T. (1998b) Why Develop Active Protective Systems
(APS)?.Miyoshi, H., Ohba, H., Kitamura, H., Inoue, T. and Hiroe, T.
(2005) Improvement of penetration performance of linear shaped
charges.Mizokami, K. (2018) Russian Vehicle Demonstrates New ‘Double
Tap’ Anti-Tank Technique., Popular Mechanics Available at:
https://www.popularmechanics.com/military/weapons/a22813930/watch-this-russian-vehicle-double-tap-a-target-with-anti-tank-missiles/
(Accessed: 17 October 2019).MOD (2011) ‘The Armoured Squadron’,
1(70590)Mulligan, P.R. (2011) ‘The effects select physical parameters
have on an explosively formed projectile’ s performance’Naudé, W. and
Dimitri, N. (2019) ‘The race for an artificial general intelligence:
implications for public policy’, AI and Society, Springer LondonNoorman,
M. and Johnson, D.G. (2014) ‘Negotiating autonomy and responsibility in
military robots’, Ethics and Information Technology, 16(1), pp.
51–62.Olsen, W. (1994) ‘Military Operations Research Analyst’s
Handbook’, Military Operations Research Society, 1Owen, W. (2020) War
Without Tanks ., RUSI Available at:
https://rusi.org/publication/rusi-newsbrief/war-without-tanks (Accessed:
17 July 2020).Paik, S.H., Kim, S.J., Yoo, Y.H. and Lee, M. (2007)
‘Protection performance of dual flying oblique plates against a yawed
long-rod penetrator’, International Journal of Impact Engineering,
34(8), pp. 1413–1422.Paliotta, C., Belleter, D.J.W. and Pettersen, K.Y.
(2015) ‘Adaptive Source Seeking with Leader-Follower Formation
Control∗∗This work was supported by the Research Council of Norway
through the Centres of Excellence funding scheme, Project numbe 223254 -
AMOS.’, IFAC-PapersOnLine, 48(16), pp. 285–290.Pang, L., Cao, Z., Yu,
J., Liang, S., Chen, X. and Zhang, W. (2019) ‘An efficient 3D pedestrian
detector with calibrated RGB camera and 3D LiDAR’, IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics, ROBIO 2019, (December), pp.
2902–2907.Papadakis, P. (2013) ‘Terrain traversability analysis methods
for unmanned ground vehicles: A survey’, Engineering Applications of
Artificial Intelligence, 26(4) Elsevier, pp. 1373–1385.Petman, J. (2017)
‘AUTONOMOUS WEAPONS SYSTEMS AND INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW: “OUT OF
THE LOOP”?’, Poonawala, H.A., Satici, A.C. and Spong, M.W. (2013)
‘Leader-follower formation control of nonholonomic wheeled mobile robots
using only position measurements’, 2013 9th Asian Control Conference,
ASCC 2013, IEEE, pp. 1–6.Rahman, A.H., Shaik, A.M., Kumar, J.R.,
Balaguru, V. and Sivakumar, P. (2017) ‘Design configuration of a
generation next main battle tank for future combat’, Defence Science
Journal, 67(4), pp. 343–353.Rheinmetall Defence (2019) Active Defense
System.Rocco, D. (2018) Hard Kill Countermeasure requirements for
Kinetic Energy threat defeat – Practical study. Cranfield
Universitr.Ryan, M. (2019) Extending the intellectual edge with
artificial intelligence.de Saint Laurent, C. (2018) ‘In defence of
machine learning: Debunking the myths of artificial intelligence’,
Europe’s Journal of Psychology, 14(4), pp. 734–747.Schwab, K. (2016)
‘Fourth Industrial Revolution’, in Penguin, pp. 181–213.Sharma-Panda,
S., Gite, L.K., Anandaraj, A., Deodhar, R.S., Joshi, D.K. and Rajan,
K.M. (2017) ‘Dispersion sensitivity analysis & consistency improvement
of APFSDS’, Defence Technology, 13(4) Elsevier Ltd, pp.
316–322.ShootersCalculator (2020) ShootersCalculator.com. Available at:
http://www.shooterscalculator.com/ (Accessed: 13 April
2020).Shoykhetbrod, A., Hommes, A. and Pohl, N. (2014) ‘A scanning
FMCW-radar system for the detection of fast moving objects’, 2014
International Radar Conference, Radar 2014, (April 2016), pp.
0–5.Sparrow, R. (2007) ‘Killer robots’, Journal of Applied Philosophy,
24(1) John Wiley & Sons, Ltd (10.1111), pp. 62–77. Available at:
10.1111/j.1468-5930.2007.00346.x (Accessed: 17 October 2019).Steven, B.
and Watt, R.R. (2010) ‘Action, Reaction, Counteraction’, Command - On
Leadership, , pp. 46–48.Teal Group (2019) World Missiles & UAVs Briefing
NT Spike.UK Government (2014) Guidance on Technology Readiness Levels.,
GOV.UK Available at:
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/guidance-on-technology-readiness-levels
(Accessed: 9 May 2020).Ullah, I., Song, T.L. and Kirubarajan, T. (2015)
‘Active vehicle protection using angle and time-to-go information from
high-resolution infrared sensors’, Optical Engineering, 54(5) SPIE-Intl
Soc Optical Eng, p. 053110.Vaitheeswaran, S., Bharath, M. and Gokul, M.
(2014) ‘Leader Follower Formation Control of Ground Vehicles Using
Camshift Based Guidance’, The International journal of Multimedia & Its
Applications, 6(6), pp. 21–33.Verma, R., Nomula, A.P. and Bendre, V.S.
(2017) ‘Study of the hypervelocity projectile launchers’, Proceedings -
2nd International Conference on Computing, Communication, Control and
Automation, ICCUBEA 2016, IEEE, pp. 1–5.Vu, L. and Lidar, S.S. (2020)
‘Leddar ^(TM) Vu8 8’Ward, E. (2018) Models Supporting Trajectory
Planning in Autonomous Vehicles.Watling, J. and Bronk, J. (2019) Strike
From Concept to Force.Wisniewski, A. and Podgorzak, P. (2005) RESEARCH
RESULTS ON PRECURSOR OF THE TANDEM SHAPED CHARGE PROJECTILE MODEL.Wolff,
C. (2020) Radar Basics - The Radar Equation., Radar Tutorial Available
at: https://www.radartutorial.eu/01.basics/The Radar Range
Equation.en.html (Accessed: 2 March 2020).Zaman, M.A. and Matin, M.A.
(2012) ‘Radar cross-section formulation of a shell-shaped projectile
using modified po analysis’, Modelling and Simulation in Engineering,
2012Zhou, W., Wang, Z. and Zhou, C. (2016) ‘Trajectory prediction and
correction methods without meteorological information’, Proceedings -
29th International Symposium on Ballistics, BALLISTICS 2016, 1, pp.
73–82.

[1] Should the reader wish to read further on the subject, the following
references are recommended: (House Of Lords, 2018), (de Saint Laurent,
2018), (Sparrow, 2007), (Noorman and Johnson, 2014), (Davison, 2018) and
(Bench-Capon, 2020).

[2] To capture the full projectile flight the units have changed from ms
to s.
